This page offers downloads for the <b>BioJava 3.0 release</b>. 

BioJava 3.0 requires <b>Java 1.6</b> or later. 

== About ==
''BioJava'' 3.0 has been released and is available using Maven from
[http://biojava.org/download/maven/ http://biojava.org/download/maven/ http://biojava.org/download/maven/]

Over the last year ''BioJava'' has undergone a major re-write. It has
been modularized into small, re-usable components and a number of new
features have been added. The new approach, modeled after the apache
commons, minimizes dependencies and allows for easier contribution of
new components.

===At the present the main modules are:===

'''biojava3-core''': The core module offers the basic tools required for
working with biological sequences of various types (DNA, RNA,
protein).  Besides file parsers for popular file formats it provides
efficient data structures for sequence manipulation and serialization.

'''biojava3-genome''': The genome module provides support for reading and
writing of gtf, gff2, gff3 file formats

'''biojava3-alignment''': This module provides implementations for pairwise
and multiple sequence alignments (MSA). The implementation for MSA
provides a flexible and multi-threaded framework that works in linear
space and that, as an option, allows the users to define anchors that
are used in the build up of the multiple alignment.

'''biojava3-structure''': The 3D protein structure module provides parsers
and a data model for working PDB and mmCif files. New features in this
release are the implementation of the CE and FATCAT structural
alignment algorithms and the support of chemical component definition
files, for a chemically and biologically correct representation of
modified residues and ligands.

'''biojava3-protmod''': The protein modification module can detect more than
200 protein modifications and crosslinks in 3D protein structures. It
comes with an XML file and Java data structures to store information
about different types of protein modifications collected from
PDB, RESID, and PSI-MOD.

Not every feature of the BioJava 1.X code base was migrated over to
BioJava 3.0. A modularized version of the 1.X sources is available as
a new "biojava-legacy" project.

== Maven Download ==
BioJava 3.0 requires [http://maven.apache.org/ Maven Maven] for the build process. We are providing a BioJava specific Maven repository at http://biojava.org/download/maven/ .

You can add the BioJava repository by adding the following XML to your project .pom file:
<pre>
	<repositories>
		...
		<repository>
			<id>biojava-maven-repo</id>
			<name>BioJava repository</name>
			<url>http://www.biojava.org/download/maven/</url>			
		</repository>
	</repositories>
</pre>


== Browse API docs ==
You can also browse the documentation at [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api3.0/ BioJava 3.0 api]

==Release Date==
BioJava 3.0 has been released on December 28th, 2010.

== Getting older versions ==

* The legacy release of 1.7.1 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7.1|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.7 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.6 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.6|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.5 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.5|here]] (requires Java 1.4.2+)
* The legacy release of 1.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.4|here]]
* The legacy release 1.3 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.3|here]].
* Older releases of BioJava can be found in the [http://www.biojava.org/download/ download area].