Eclipse is a common IDE for using BioJava.

== Prerequisites ==

# Download Eclipse from [http://www.eclipse.org/ http://www.eclipse.org/]. Several flavors are available, which come with different pre-installed plugins. We recommend starting with 'Eclipse IDE for Java Developers'.
# Install the following plugins. See [[#Plugin Installation]] below for detailed instructions.
#* m2e - Maven Integration for Eclipse
#* Eclipse EGit
#* m2e-egit SCM Handler

== Cloning the repository ==

We recommend [[Contributing to BioJava#Forking Biojava|creating a fork]] on github for day-to-day development. In the following instructions you should substitute something like 'https://github.com/<username>/biojava.git' for the repository URL. If you don't want to make a fork (for instance, if you don't plan to make any changes), you can follow the instructions below exactly.

''TODO: write instructions''

== Plugin Installation ==

''This section needs to be expanded with specific instructions for installing plugins using either Marketplace or directly from the Install software menu.''

Recent versions of Eclipse come with the Marketplace plugin, which can be used to find and install additional plugins. Feel free to install the prerequisites from Marketplace. This tutorial uses the older method of installing plugins directly from their repositories, which is compatible with more versions of Eclipse.

=== 1. Install Maven m2e ===

# In eclipse, go to {{menu2|Help|Install New Software...}}

=== 2. Install EGit ===

=== 3. Install the SCM Handler ===