This page offers downloads for the <b>BioJava Legacy 1.8.4 release</b>. 

BioJava Legacy 1.8.4 requires <b>Java 1.5</b> or later. 

== About ==
BioJava legacy 1.8.4 has been released and is available using Maven from http://biojava.org/download/maven/

Over the last year BioJava has undergone a major re-write. A new code base has been started under the codename [[BioJava:Download|BioJava 3]]. The old BioJava code (or BioJava 1 or BioJava Legacy) has been modularized into small, re-usable components and is available for download on this page.

== Maven Download ==
BioJava Legacy 1.8.4 requires [http://maven.apache.org/ Maven] for the build process. We are providing a BioJava specific Maven repository at http://biojava.org/download/maven/ .

You can add the BioJava repository by adding the following XML to your project .pom file:
<pre>
	<repositories>
		...
		<repository>
			<id>biojava-maven-repo</id>
			<name>BioJava repository</name>
			<url>http://www.biojava.org/download/maven/</url>			
		</repository>
	</repositories>
</pre>

== Manual Download ==
'''Download the entire project:'''

[http://biojava.org/download/bj1.8.4/biojava-legacy-1.8.4-all.tar.gz  biojava-legacy-1.8.4-all.tar.gz] 

== Browse API docs ==
You can also browse the documentation at [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api1.8.4/ BioJava Legacy 1.8.4 api]

==Release Dates==
BioJava 1.8 has been released on December 28th, 2010.

BioJava 1.8.1 has been released on February 13th, 2011. 

BioJava 1.8.2 has been released on March 22th, 2012.

BioJava 1.8.3 was not released.

BioJava 1.8.4 has been released on August 27th, 2013.


== Getting older versions ==
* The legacy release of 1.8.2 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.2|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.8.1 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.1|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.7.1 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7.1|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.7 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.6 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.6|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.5 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.5|here]] (requires Java 1.4.2+)
* The legacy release of 1.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.4|here]]
* The legacy release 1.3 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.3|here]].

== Getting BioJava 3 ==
* BioJava 3 can be found in the [http://www.biojava.org/download/ download area].