Converted entry.getValue() to string before submitting it to sendAlignmentRequest because it won't catch the DNASequence version.

Also, it keeps giving this error due to a bug in the biojava code: java.lang.Exception: ''The key named PROGRAM is not set in this RemoteQBlastOutputProperties object''

------------------

Hi,

Thanks for the input. I'll look into this ASAP.

--[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 12:41, 19 February 2011 (UTC)

------------------

HI,

Ok, here goes: 

Your first bug might be related to the fact that in my example code, you read a file with ProteinSequences in an array and ProteinSequence objects are what is expected here:

<java>
			for (Entry<String, ProteinSequence> entry : a.entrySet()) {
				System.out.println( entry.getValue().getOriginalHeader() + "\n");
				request = rbw.sendAlignmentRequest(entry.getValue(),rqb);
				rid.add(request);			}
</java>

If you are using DNASequences, you need to do this:

<java>			for (Entry<String, DNASequence> entry : a.entrySet()) {
				System.out.println( entry.getValue().getOriginalHeader() + "\n");
				request = rbw.sendAlignmentRequest(entry.getValue(),rqb);
				rid.add(request);			}
</java>

I can tell you this works a-ok :-)

The second thing is a bug in the code that I have now fixed in the biojava-live svn. Please give it a try and let me know if it works. It does for me...

--[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 01:45, 21 February 2011 (UTC)

--------------

Hi,

It works now with the fixed biojava-live svn. For some odd reason that also fixed the first bug. I only had to give rqb a blank setAdvancedOptions otherwise that would give an error.

Sorry for ruining this wiki discussion page with these posts that are obviously not done the correct way, i am new to this ;)

Thanks for your quick response and fix