This page offers downloads for the <b>BioJava Legacy 1.9.0 release</b>. 

BioJava Legacy 1.9.0 requires <b>Java 1.5</b> or later. 

== About ==
BioJava Legacy 1.9.0 has been released and is available using Maven from http://biojava.org/download/maven/

Over the last year BioJava has undergone a major re-write. A new code base has been started under the codename [[BioJava:Download|BioJava 3]]. The old BioJava code (or BioJava 1 or BioJava Legacy) has been modularized into small, re-usable components and is available for download on this page.

== Maven Download ==
BioJava Legacy 1.9.0 requires [http://maven.apache.org/ Maven] for the build process.  As of version 1.9.0, BioJava Legacy artifacts are available from the Maven Central repository.

To include BioJava in your project, add module dependencies such as:
<pre>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.biojava</groupId>
      <artifactId>core</artifactId>
      <version>1.9.0</version>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>
</pre>

Search the Maven Central repository http://search.maven.org/#search|ga|1|g%3A%22org.biojava%22


== Manual Download ==
'''Download the entire project:'''

[http://biojava.org/download/bj1.9.0/biojava-legacy-1.9.0-all.tar.gz  biojava-legacy-1.9.0-all.tar.gz] 

== Browse API docs ==
You can also browse the documentation at [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api1.9.0/ BioJava Legacy 1.9.0 api]

==Release Dates==
BioJava 1.8 has been released on December 28th, 2010.

BioJava 1.8.1 has been released on February 13th, 2011. 

BioJava 1.8.2 has been released on March 22th, 2012.

BioJava 1.8.3 was not released.

BioJava 1.8.4 has been released on August 27th, 2013.

BioJava 1.8.5 has been released on April 2nd, 2014.

BioJava 1.9.0 has been released on June 25th, 2014.

== Getting older versions ==
* The legacy release of 1.8.5 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.5|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.8.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.4|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.8.2 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.2|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.8.1 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.8.1|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.7.1 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7.1|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.7 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.6 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.6|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.5 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.5|here]] (requires Java 1.4.2+)
* The legacy release of 1.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.4|here]]
* The legacy release 1.3 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.3|here]].

== Getting BioJava 3 ==
* BioJava 3 can be found in the [http://www.biojava.org/download/ download area].