== What needs starting? ==

* BioJavaX docbook need converting to Wiki - quite hard
* Conversion of cookbook and tutorials to reflect 1.4 (and/or BioJavax) conventions - requires someone with in-depth knowledge of the complete workings of BioJava
* Consolidate cookbook, tutorials and BJX docbook into a single HowTo - time-consuming, might as well just write a book!
* User mailing list - easy
* Susbcribe to mailing list - easy
* Mailing list archive - not sure how to transfer this? Probably link to old archive
* Dev mailing list stuff - as per user mailing list
* Related sites eg bioperl, biopython etc - easy, could use interwiki

== Whats in progress? ==
* Choosing a logo!
* Tutorial - laborious but straightforward, some parts are in need of updating and/or are no longer relevant (I can't update it, because I've not enough experiences with the classes, but I'll take on the formatting --[[User:Martin|Martin]] 15:52, 7 February 2006 (EST))
* Cookbook (BioJava in Anger) - as per Tutorial but there's much more of it, very laborious indeed (lots of copy and paste). (By start I´ll work here. --[[User:Guedes|Guedes]] 15:50, 6 February 2006 (EST)) (French version: working on it - --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 12:36, 6 February 2006 (EST))
* Participants - Mostly links to user pages. eg User:Mark. This is not ideal. Jason is going to set up a People domain then we can set User:Mark to redirect to People:Mark Schreiber

== Whats done already? ==
* About BioJava
* Getting BioJava
* Thanks
* Getting Started (Done --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 12:49, 6 February 2006 (EST))
* JavaDoc 1.3 - how? link back to old? Links to old established --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 12:13, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* JavaDoc 1.4 - how? link back to old? Links to old established --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 12:13, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* Hackers Guide - Done --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 16:37, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* Download 1.3 - Done -- [[User:Martin|Martin]] 12:18, 7 February 2006 (EST)
* Download 1.4 - Done -- [[User:Martin|Martin]] 12:18, 7 February 2006 (EST)		 
* CVS access - Unnecessary -- links to CVS and WebCVS are already in [[BioJava::GetStarted]]-- [[User:Rholland|Rholland]] 14:51, 8 February 2006 (SGT)
* WebCVS - Unnecessary -- links to CVS and WebCVS are already in [[BioJava::GetStarted]]-- [[User:Rholland|Rholland]] 14:51, 8 February 2006 (SGT)

== Inspiration ==

If you don't know the best way to do it take a look at the [[bp:Main_Page|bioperl]] home page for inspiration.

Also try looking at the [[bp:Style_guide|bioperl style guide]] for hints on making links etc