=Release plan for BioJava 1.5=

===Background===
We would like to begin work on making a 1.5 release of BioJava. This will include all new developments such as the BioJavaX and structure APIs.

I propose we initially make a BioJava1.5 beta which will be a snapshot of CVS and will only contain the documentation, demos and unit tests at that date (not a complete and up to date suite). 

A full BioJava 1.5 final release will ideally contain fully updated documentation, demos, unit tests etc.

===Status===

In progress

==Pre-release tasks==

===Coding===

===Documentation===
* Update [[BioJava:Cookbook|Cookbook]] code to reflect best practices with BioJavaX
* Should we keep legacy examples in the [[BioJava:Cookbook|Cookbook]]?
* Check for errors in biojavax docbook

===Javadoc===
* The ant javadoc-all task must complete without any failures or warnings. 
* Volunteers are needed to check for poorly javadoced packages and add comments where they can.

===Quality===
* All JUnit tests must pass.
* Volunteers needed to increase coverage of JUnit tests.
* We badly need JUnit tests for BioJavaX / BioSQL interaction
* Can someone with a good testing tool generate a coverage report?

===Check compatibility===
====Are RichSequence objects compatable with GUI code?====
* We need a volunteer to test how well RichSequence objects behaive with biojava's GUI code. 
* GUI code as well as relevant javadocs, demos, and cookbook code may need to change.

====Are BioJavaX objects compatable with DAS/DAZZLE?====
Someone with experience of the DAS server DAZZLE is needed to check if there are any issues with DAS and BioJavaX objects. This may not be at all relevant but it would pay to check.

====Backwards Compatibility====
* Are there any breaks in the API between biojava 1.4 and biojava 1.5?
* Can someone run a change tool that will detect API differences that would prevent biojava 1.4 apps compiling with biojava 1.5

===Alpha, beta, RCs===

===Release notes===

==Wish-list, or Items-yet-to-be-sorted==

Edit this section with items to be considered for the 1.5 release