This page offers downloads for the BioJava 1.5-beta3 release. BioJava 1.5-beta3 runs only on Java 2 Standard Edition 1.4 (or later) platforms.

== Complete Download ==
A complete download is available as one [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj15b/all/bj1.5-b3-all.tar tar] file (16Mb). The file contains all binaries, required jars, docs, source, test, demos and apps as gzipped tar files.

== BioJava binaries ==

A complete binary distribution is available as one large [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj15b/bin/bj1.5-b3-bin.tar.gz gzip] file (3.5Mb). It contains the biojava.jar as well as the apps.jar, demos.jar and the supporting libraries.

=== Support libraries ===

* bytecode.jar: Required to run biojava
*  commons-cli.jar: Only required to compile and use some of the demos
*  commons-collections-2.1.jar: only required for some demos and BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)
*  commons-dbcp-1.1.jar: Only required for legacy BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)
*  commons-pool-1.1.jar: Only required for legacy BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)

== Source Files ==

The full source distribution is available as a [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj15b/src/bj1.5-b3-src.tar.gz gzip] file (7.8Mb) that can be fully built using ant.

== Documentation ==

Documentation is available as a [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj15b/doc/bj1.5-b3-doc.tar.gz gzip] file (4.5Mb) that includes the javadocs for the API, demos and apps.

== CVS access ==

the CVS repository can be browsed at:
http://code.open-bio.org/cgi/viewcvs.cgi/biojava-live/?cvsroot=biojava

An RSS of biojava-live is [http://www.biojava.org/CVS2RSS/biojava-live.rss available]

== Getting older versions ==

* The legacy release of 1.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.4|here]]
* The legacy release 1.3 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.3|here]].
* Other releases of BioJava can be found in the [http://www.biojava.org/download/ download area].