== How does sequence I/O work in biojava? ==

Most sequence databases present sequences in some kind of flat file format such as the EMBL or Fasta formats. Biojava can read a number of these and convert them into Sequence objects. The SeqIOTools class provides many static methods that do this for you. In most cases this is great but you may want to write a parser for a format that is not supported by biojava. Alternatively, you might not want to generate Sequence objects. For example if you only wanted the the names of all the sequences in a very large file it would be horribly inefficient to make them all into full Sequence objects only to call getName() on them and send them off to the Garbage Collector. If you did this for the entire nr set of GenBank you could be twiddling your thumbs for ages while the parser assembles all the features, symbollists and annotations. Using biojava's sequence I/O API it is possible to make your own parsers. It is also possible to plug-in your own components with the already existing parsers to generate a highly customized parsing architecture.

The core of the API are the two interfaces SequenceFormat and SeqIOListener. The API is heavily based on the event/ call-back model. Conceptually, an implementation of SequenceFormat knows how to read (and write) a sequence file of some format. When it reads the file it emits events based on what it is seeing in the file. The events are passed to an implementation of SeqIOListener. The SequenceFormat makes callbacks to the methods of the SeqIOListener. The SequenceFormat also makes use of a SymbolTokenizer that translates sequence in text based characters to biojava Symbols

The opportunity for customization really comes in with the implementation of SeqIOListener. The biojava javadocs show that there are several implementations of this interface. One obvious thing a SeqIOListener can do it make a biojava Sequence object. Another thing it could do would be to 'tee' the events it is recieving to two or more registered SeqIOListeners that can each do their own thing. The listener could ignore all the events it is not interested in and pass on to other listeners a select few events, effectively making it a filter. You could also filter entire entries passing on ones that meet a certain criteria to a SequenceBuilder, for example maybe you have a huge file but are only interested in those records with a certain keyword or those from a certain species. The listener can even modify events before parsing them on. This might be useful if you want to add extra information to the Sequences you are building. If you have the problem described above and only want to extract the names you could implement a listener that only has functional code in the setName(String name) method does nothing with all the other events.

The example below is a class that echos IO events to STDOUT. This class is useful to see what is happening as a file is being read. It would also be helpful if you wanted to debug a SequenceFormat class and make sure it is emitting the correct events at the right time. It would also help you to write a custom SeqIOListener by showing you which events you need to block/ listen-for / modify.

=== SeqIOEcho.java ===

<java>
/*
 * SeqIOEcho.java
 *
 * Created on May 10, 2005, 2:39 PM
 */

import java.io.BufferedReader;
import java.io.FileReader;
import java.util.Iterator;
import org.biojava.bio.Annotation;
import org.biojava.bio.seq.Feature;
import org.biojava.bio.seq.io.SeqIOListener;
import org.biojava.bio.seq.io.SequenceFormat;
import org.biojava.bio.seq.io.SymbolTokenization;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.Alphabet;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.AlphabetManager;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.SimpleSymbolList;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.Symbol;


/**
 * A SeqIOListener that reports events being emitted by a format object
 * @author Mark Schreiber
 */
public class SeqIOEcho implements SeqIOListener {
    int tab = 0;
    
    
    /** Creates a new instance of SeqIOEcho */
    public SeqIOEcho() {
        
    }

    public void setURI(String uri) {
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to setURI(String uri)");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"uri: "+uri);
        tab--;
    }

    public void setName(String name) {
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to setName(String name)");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"name: "+name);
        tab--;
    }

    public void startFeature(Feature.Template templ){
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to startFeature(Feature.Template templ)");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"type: "+templ.type);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"source: "+templ.source);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"location: "+templ.location);
        tab--;
    }

    public void addSymbols(Alphabet alpha, Symbol[] syms, int start, int length) {
        System.out.println(tabOut()+
                "Call to addSymbols(Alphabet alpha, Symbol[] syms, int start, int length)");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"alpha: "+alpha.getName());
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"syms.length: "+syms.length);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"start: "+start);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"length: "+length);
        
        SimpleSymbolList ssl = new SimpleSymbolList(alpha);
        try{
            for(int i = start; i < length; i++){
                ssl.addSymbol(syms[i]);
            }
        }catch(Exception e){
            e.printStackTrace();
        }
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Symbol[]: "+ssl.seqString());
        tab--;
    }

    public void startSequence() {
        
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to startSequence()");
        tab++;
    }

    public void addSequenceProperty(Object key, Object value) {
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to addSequenceProperty(Object key, Object value) ");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"key: "+key);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"value: "+value);
        tab--;
    }

    public void endFeature() {
        tab--;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to endFeature()");
    }

    public void endSequence() {
        tab--;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to endSequence()");
    }

    public void addFeatureProperty(Object key, Object value) {
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Call to addFeatureProperty(Object key, Object value)");
        tab++;
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"key: "+key);
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"value: "+value);
        tab--;
    }
    
    
    private String tabOut(){
        StringBuffer sb = new StringBuffer();
        for(int i = 0; i < tab; i++){
            sb.append("\t");
        }
        return sb.toString();
    }
    
    private void dumpAnnotation(Annotation anno){
        System.out.println(tabOut()+"Annotation: "+anno.getClass().getName());
        tab++;
        for(Iterator i = anno.keys().iterator(); i.hasNext();){
            Object key = i.next();
            Object val = anno.getProperty(key);
            System.out.println(tabOut()+"key: "+key+" value: "+val);
        }
        tab--;
    }
    
     /**
      * Run the program. The file name, format class name and alphabet name
      * are all supplied to the command line.
      * @param args arg[0] the file containing the sequences
      * arg[1] the fully qualified name of the format class to be used
      * (eg "org.biojava.bio.seq.io.FastaFormat")
      * arg[2] the case sensitive name of the alphabet (eg "DNA" or "Protein");
      */
    public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception{
        BufferedReader br = new BufferedReader(new FileReader(args[0]));
        
        Class formatClass = Class.forName(args[1]);
        SequenceFormat format = (SequenceFormat)formatClass.newInstance();
        SeqIOListener echo = new SeqIOEcho();
        SymbolTokenization toke = 
                AlphabetManager.alphabetForName(args[2]).getTokenization("token");
    
        boolean moreSeq = false;
        do{
            moreSeq = format.readSequence(br, toke, echo);
        }while(moreSeq);
        
    }
}
</java>