== Introduction ==
Welcome to BioJava 1 or BioJava Legacy. BioJava Legacy is the continuation of the old BioJava core while a new code base, BioJava 3, is currently being developed. As of the concurrent release of BioJava {{current version legacy}} and BioJava {{current version}}, many functionalities are still not available in BioJava 3 and differences between their respective sequence models may make BioJava 1 a valid option for your project.

To find out more about BioJava 1, check any of the following entry points:
* [[BioJava:Tutorial|Tutorial]] to learn about symbols, sequence, and events.
* [[BioJava:CookBookLegacy|Cook Book]], also famously known as BioJava in Anger, to find out many code snippets.
* [[BioJava:BioJavaXDocs|BioJavax Extension]] which provides sophisticated event-based methods to read, write, and manipulate sequence files.

== Installation ==
BioJava 1 will run on any computer with a Java virtual machine complying to the Java 2 Standard Edition (J2SE) 1.5 (or later) specifications. Java implementations for Linux, Windows, and Solaris are available to download from [http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/ Oracle's java website]. Recent versions of MacOS X include a suitable Java implementation as standard. Java is also available on many other platforms: if in doubt, contact your vendor. BioJava binaries are distributed in .jar (Java ARchive) format.

You can get the latest version from the download page [[Biojava:Download_{{current version legacy}}|BioJava {{current version legacy}} (requires Java 1.5+)]]. 

You can also integrate BioJava with NetBeans IDE. To find out how follow this [[How_to_integrate_BioJava_in_NetBeans_IDE|link]].

None of these .jar files need to be unpacked for normal use -- simply place them in a convenient directory. To use BioJava, add the required JAR files to your CLASSPATH environment variable. The exact syntax varies between platforms. The text is wrapped due to limited space. The actual commands should be on a single line:

=== UNIX Bourne-type shells (the default with most Linux distributions and MacOS 10.3) ===

 export CLASSPATH=/home/thomas/biojava-live.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== UNIX C-type shell (for example: versions of Mac OS X pre-10.3)===

 setenv CLASSPATH /home/thomas/biojava-live.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== Windows from command line ===

 set CLASSPATH C:\biojava-live.jar;C:\bytecode.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;.

=== Windows autoexec.bat files ===

 set CLASSPATH=C:\biojava-live.jar;C:\bytecode.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-pool-1.1.jar;.

In some distributions of Biojava, you need to specify biojava.jar instead of biojava-live.jar in the above. Note: Since version 1.8, BioJava is modular and the scripts need to be adjusted to incorporate submodules.

It is also possible to "install" JAR files onto your system by copying them into your Java installation's extensions directory. On most Unix systems, this is named ''${JAVA_HOME}/jre/lib/ext''. On Mac OS X there is a per-user extensions directory called ''~/Library/Java/Extensions'' (you may have to create this directory yourself). For other platforms, consult your Java vendor.

You can now compile and run BioJava programs using the ''javac'' and ''java'' commands. You might like to look at the [[BioJava:Tutorial|tutorial]], [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api{{current version legacy}} API documentation] and the [[BioJava:CookBookLegacy |Legacy Cookbook]] section. Finally, you can learn a lot about BioJava by trying the demo programs included in the source distribution (see below).

==  Building your own ==

If you want to modify BioJava, you can obtain a copy of the source code from the [http://biojava.org/download/maven/ Maven repository] of the download area. Source releases are distributed in .tar.gz format. You can also obtain up-to-the-minute [[Get source|source code]].

Since version 1.8, BioJava Legacy 1.8 requires [http://maven.apache.org/ Maven] for the build process. We are also providing a BioJava specific Maven repository at http://biojava.org/download/maven/ .

== Building the demo programs ==

The source distribution contains a number of small demo programs. Once you have a working ''biojava.jar'' on your classpath, these can be compiled directly using ''javac'' from the demos directory.

  (unix)
  cd demos
  javac seq/TestEmbl.java
  java seq.TestEmbl seq/AL121903.embl
  
  (windows)
  cd demos
  javac seq\TestEmbl.java
  java seq.TestEmbl seq\AL121903.embl