== Introduction ==

BioJava will run on any computer with a Java virtual machine complying to the Java 2 Standard Edition (J2SE) 1.4 (or later) specifications. Java implementations for Linux, Windows, and Solaris are available to download from [http://java.sun.com Sun's java website]. Recent versions of MacOS X include a suitable Java implementation as standard. Java is also available on many other platforms: if in doubt, contact your vendor. BioJava binaries are distributed in .jar (Java ARchive) format.

You can get the legacy release version of BioJava 1.3 [[Biojava:Download 1.3|here]]; or

You can get the release version of BioJava 1.4 [[Biojava:Download 1.4|here]].

But if you can always get the latest release version go to the [http://www.biojava.org/download download area].

== Installation ==

None of these .jar files need to be unpacked for normal use -- simply place them in a convenient directory.

To use BioJava, add the required JAR files to your CLASSPATH environment variable. The exact syntax varies between platforms. The text is wrapped due to limited space. The actual commands should be on a single line:

=== UNIX Bourne-type shells (the default with most Linux distributions and MacOS 10.3) ===

 export CLASSPATH=/home/thomas/biojava.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode-0.92.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== UNIX C-type shell (for example: versions of Mac OS X pre-10.3)===

 setenv CLASSPATH /home/thomas/biojava.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode-0.92.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== Windows from command line ===

 set CLASSPATH C:\biojava.jar;C:\bytecode-0.92.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;.

=== Windows autoexec.bat files ===

 set CLASSPATH=C:\biojava.jar;C:\bytecode-0.92.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;.

It is also possible to "install" JAR files onto your system by copying them into your Java installation's extensions directory. On most Unix systems, this is named ''${JAVA_HOME}/jre/lib/ext''. On Mac OS X there is a per-user extensions directory called ''~/Library/Java/Extensions'' (you may have to create this directory yourself). For other platforms, consult your Java vendor.

You can now compile and run BioJava programs using the ''javac'' and ''java'' commands. You might like to look at the [[BioJava:Tutorial|tutorial]], [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api/index.html API documentation] and the [[BioJava:Cookbook |BioJava in anger]] section . Finally, you can learn a lot about BioJava by trying the demo programs included in the source distribution (see below).

==  Building your own ==

If you want to modify BioJava, you can obtain a copy of the source code from the [http://www.biojava.org/download/source Source directory] of the download area. Source releases are distributed in .tar.gz format. You can also obtain up-to-the-minute source code from the [http://www.derkholm.net Nightly build site] or from [http://cvs.biojava.org anonymous CVS].

BioJava is built using the ''ant'' build tool, a Java-specific equivalent of the common Make utilities. Please download and install the latest version of ''ant'' (currently 1.6.1). It is available [http://ant.apache.org here].

To build the library, just change into the biojava-live directory and type ''ant''. The final JAR file will be placed in the ''ant-build'' directory. You can also use the command ''ant javadocs-biojava'' to build the API documentation.

== Building the demo programs ==

The source distribution contains a number of small demo programs. Once you have a working ''biojava.jar'' on your classpath, these can be compiled directly using ''javac'' from the demos directory.

  (unix)
  cd demos
  javac seq/TestEmbl.java
  java seq.TestEmbl seq/AL121903.embl
  
  (windows)
  cd demos
  javac seq\TestEmbl.java
  java seq.TestEmbl seq\AL121903.embl