== Comment puis-je faire un algorithme g&eacute;n&eacute;tique avec BioJava? ==

Avec l'introduction du package org.biojavax.ga dans la version biojava-live, il est maintenant possible de cr&eacute;er des algorithmes g&eacute;n&eacute;tiques avec BioJava. Les alogrithmes g&eacute;n&eacute;tiques sont des algorithmes de simulation, d'optimisation ou de solutions de probl&egrave;mes qui tentent de faire "&eacute;voluer" une solution pour un probl&egrave;me. La solution en volution est repr&eacute;sen&eacute;e sous la forme d'un "chromosome", typiquement une cha&icirc;ne de caract&egrave;res binaires quoique d'autres formes d'encodage puissent &ecirc;tre possibles. &Agrave; chaque g&eacute;n&eacute;ration (ou it&eacute;ration), une population de chromosomes est disponible. Tel de vrais chromosomes, ils sont capables de muter et de se recombiner &agrave; une certaine fr&eacute;quence pour chaque g&eacute;n&eacute;ration. Le point critique est qu'&agrave; chaque ronde de mutation/recombinaison potentielles, seul les chromosomes ayant la meilleure solution sont s&eacute;lectionn&eacute;s pour r&eacute;plication. Par cons&eacute;quent, la tendance de l'algorithme sera de produire des solutions de plus en plus efficaces pour une population.

L'exemple ci-dessous d&eacute;montre

The example below demonstrates a very simple genetic algorithm constructed using the GA framework. The framework is designed to be very flexible and uses an interchangeable parts philosophy. The core interface is the GeneticAlgorithm with its default implementation, SimpleGeneticAlgorithm. The GeneticAlgorithm takes any Population of Organisms and iterates through the generations. At each step a MutationFunction and a CrossOverFunction are responsible for introducing variation. A FitnessFunction is responsible for determining the fitness of each Organism in the context of it's parent Population. Because fitness can be calculated in the context of a Population it is possible to model competition within a Population. The Organisms to be selected for replication are nominated by the SelectionFunction usually on the basis of their fitness. The GeneticAlgorithm will stop iterating when the GAStoppingCriteria tells it to. This may be when a suitable solution has been reached or after a finite number of generations.

The functions and stopping criteria are all Java interfaces so custom implementations are possible. The only requirement for the GeneticAlgorithm is that is has a Population, a MutationFunction, a CrossOverFunction, a FitnessFunction, a SelectionFunction and a GAStoppingCriteria. The actual implementations used are interchangeable. Further, the 'chromosome(s)' of the Organisms in a Population are just BioJava SymbolLists and any Alphabet could be used to encode a solution.

The org.biojavax.ga package is available with biojava-live from CVS. It will also be bundled with the core biojava distribution in version 1.5 when released. The code requires Java 1.4

=== GADemo.java ===

<pre>
package GA;

import java.util.Iterator;
import org.biojava.bio.dist.Distribution;
import org.biojava.bio.dist.DistributionTools;
import org.biojava.bio.dist.UniformDistribution;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.SimpleSymbolList;
import org.biojava.bio.symbol.SymbolList;
import org.biojavax.ga.GAStoppingCriteria;
import org.biojavax.ga.Population;
import org.biojavax.ga.Organism;
import org.biojavax.ga.GeneticAlgorithm;
import org.biojavax.ga.impl.SimplePopulation;
import org.biojavax.ga.impl.SimpleOrganism;
import org.biojavax.ga.impl.SimpleGeneticAlgorithm;
import org.biojavax.ga.util.GATools;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.FitnessFunction;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.CrossOverFunction;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.SelectionFunction;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.ProportionalSelection;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.MutationFunction;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.SimpleMutationFunction;
import org.biojavax.ga.functions.SimpleCrossOverFunction;

/**
 * <p> Demos a very Simple GA. It will run until one organism contains
 * a chromosome that is 75% ones</p>
 *
 * @author Mark Schreiber
 * @version 1.0
 */

public class GADemo{
  public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception{
    //print the header
    System.out.println("gen,average_fitness,best_fitness");

    //a uniform Distribution over the binary Alphabet
    Distribution bin_dist = new UniformDistribution(GATools.getBinaryAlphabet());

    //initialize the population
    Population pop = new SimplePopulation("demo population");

    //add 100 organisms
    for(int i = 0; i < 100; i++){
      Organism o = new SimpleOrganism("organism"+i);

      //make 1 random chromosome for each organism
      SymbolList[] ch = new SymbolList[1];
      //the symbols are randomly sampled from bin_dist
      ch[0] = new SimpleSymbolList(DistributionTools.generateSequence(
          "", bin_dist, 100));

      //set the organisms chromosome to be ch
      o.setChromosomes(ch);

      //add to organism to the population pop
      pop.addOrganism(o);
    }


    //created a SelectionFunction
    SelectionFunction sf = new ProportionalSelection();
    //set its FitnessFunction
    sf.setFitnessFunction(new DemoFitness());

    //create a new CrossOverFunction
    CrossOverFunction cf = new SimpleCrossOverFunction();
    //set the max number of cross overs per chromosome
    cf.setMaxCrossOvers(1);
    //set a uniform cross over probability of 0.01
    cf.setCrossOverProbs(new double[]{0.01});

    //create a new MutationFunction
    MutationFunction mf = new SimpleMutationFunction();
    //set a uniform MutationProbability of 0.0001
    mf.setMutationProbs(new double[]{0.0001});
    //set the mutation spectrum of the function to be a standard
    //mutation distribution over the binary Alphabet
    mf.setMutationSpectrum(
        GATools.standardMutationDistribution(GATools.getBinaryAlphabet()));

    //make a GeneticAlgorithm with the above functions
    GeneticAlgorithm genAlg = new SimpleGeneticAlgorithm(pop, mf, cf, sf);
    //run the Algorithm until the criteria of DemoStopping are met
    genAlg.run(new DemoStopping());
  }

  /**
   * Basic implementation of GAStopping Criteria
   *
   */
  static class DemoStopping implements GAStoppingCriteria{

    /**
     * Determines when to stop the Algorithm
     */
    public boolean stop (GeneticAlgorithm genAlg){
      System.out.print(genAlg.getGeneration()+",");
      Population pop = genAlg.getPopulation();
      double totalFit = 0.0;

      FitnessFunction ff = genAlg.getSelectionFunction().getFitnessFunction();

      double fit = 0.0;
      double bestFitness = 0.0;

      for (Iterator it = pop.organisms(); it.hasNext(); ) {
        Organism o = (Organism)it.next();
        fit = ff.fitness(o, pop, genAlg);
        bestFitness = Math.max(fit, bestFitness);
        totalFit += fit;
      }

      //print the average fitness
      System.out.print((totalFit/ (double) pop.size())+",");
      //print the best fitness
      System.out.println(bestFitness);

      //fitness is 75.0 so stop the algorithm
      if(bestFitness >= 75.0){
        System.out.println("Organism found with Fitness of 75%");
        return true;
      }

      //no organism is fit enough, continue the algorithm
      return false;
    }
  }

  /**
   * A fitness function bases on the most "one" rich chromosome in the organism.
   *
   */
  static class DemoFitness implements FitnessFunction{
    public double fitness(Organism o, Population p, GeneticAlgorithm genAlg){
      double bestfit = 0.0;

      for (int i = 0; i < o.getChromosomes().length; i++) {
        SymbolList csome = o.getChromosomes()[i];
        double fit = 0.0;
        for(int j = 1; j <= csome.length(); j++){
          if(csome.symbolAt(j) == GATools.one())
            fit++;
        }
        bestfit = Math.max(fit, bestfit);
      }

      return bestfit;
    }
  }
}
</pre>