==How to make a BioJava release==

This page is intended for BioJava release managers. I was documenting this while I was doing the BioJava 1.7 release. --[[User:Andreas|Andreas]] 15:14, 12 April 2009 (UTC)

===Required time===
A few hours. Most time is being spent in verifying that the code base is release ready. The actual preparation of the .jar files and copying them to the open-bio.org server is quite quick and can be done semi-automatic.

===Prior to release===
* Announce release deadlines on mailing list
* Run optimize imports across whole project
* Make sure all java classes have the copyright statement by running this shell script: [[BioJava:EnsureCopyrightHeader]]

=== Configure Authentication Keys ===

You need to configure the following 3 items for performing a full release
1) OSS Sonatype login (OSS Jira account login)
2) PGP signature for code signing (only can upload signed jars to OSS Sonatype)
3) SSH keys for cloudportal.open-bio.org

==== OSS Sonatype login ====
As of release 4.0.0 we moved our repository hosting from biojava's web server to Maven Central. To push releases there, you need to first get an account set up at the [https://issues.sonatype.org OSS Sonatype Jira]. One of the people who already have permission (currently @andreasprlic and @heuermh) can request to add you to the already existing biojava project. The BioJava pom.xml is set up correctly to upload the jars for you, as long as you set up your login:

You need to configure maven with your username and identity file. In ~/.m2/settings.xml (on the build machine), add or merge the following xml:

 <settings xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0"
     xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
     xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0
     http://maven.apache.org/xsd/settings-1.0.0.xsd">
     <localRepository/>
     <interactiveMode/>
     <usePluginRegistry/>
     <offline/>
     <pluginGroups/>
     <mirrors/>
     <proxies/>
     <profiles/>
     <activeProfiles/>
     <servers>
         <server>
             <id>ossrh</id>
             <username>username</username>
             <password>pwd</password>
         </server>
     </servers>
 </settings>

Maven reports 'Auth Error' in the release:perform stage if you keys are not properly set up. Permissions errors mean that authentication was successful but you can not write to the correct location (for instance, if a maven-metadata.xml exists from a previous build by another user).

More information about using the Maven release plugin to push to OSS Sonatype is [http://blog.sonatype.com/2013/09/simplified-releases-to-the-central-repository-with-nexus/#.VMsj7l7F-kc here].

==== BioJava web server SSH key ====
To complete the release you need permission to scp files to the maven repository on cloudportal.open-bio.org. If you need help with that, talk to root@open-bio.org. Make sure you have ssh keys set up to log in, and that you are a member of the apache group so that you can write to the web directory.

==== PGP Signature ====

Set up a PGP signature for code signing. For documentation how to do this see [https://www.gnupg.org/gph/en/manual/c14.html here].

==On release date==

'''Verify code base'''

* Make sure code is ready for release. Check last minute commits (there usually are some).
* Make sure the auto-build page (cruisecontrol) does not report any problems

== Clean checkout ==

Create a clean clone on a machine with ssh keys set up to access cloudportal.open-bio.org (and associated maven settings; see above).

 git clone git@github.com:biojava/biojava.git bj3.0.7


===Make maven release===

the release process is very straightforward nowadays. It is rather time-consuming, as maven runs all tests during each step. 

 mvn release:clean 
 mvn release:prepare 
 mvn release:perform

The second and third steps set up your local git repository and deploy jar files for each module to cloudportal. If something goes wrong, you can technically run `mvn release:rollback`, but it is easier to just reset your git repository to master.

 git reset --hard origin/master

AP: I recommend NOT to do git reset, once files have been uploaded to sonatype. release:rollback will clean up for you.

===Push to Github===

If all three steps work fine, the maven release plugin will push on your behalf to Github and release the jars on OSS Sonatype. Note: mvn:release takes about 1 hour since the bandwith to upload at OSS Sonatype is limited.


If there is a problem, here how to add the release tag by hand:

push the tag to github and merge it to releases. Note that I'm assuming origin refers to the central biojava repository.

<span style="color:red">Note: double check these commands</span>

 git pull master #merge any commits that occurred while releasing
 git push --tags origin master #push the new master (with updated pom) and new tags

 git checkout release
 git merge biojava-3.0.7
 git diff biojava-3.0.7 release #shouldn't print anything
 git push origin release


And here how to delete a release tag again:

 git tag -d biojava-3.0.7 
 git push origin :refs/tags/biojava-3.0.7

===Prepare and release javadoc files===
(Still in git checkout, e.g. bj3.0.7 if you're following along or biojava/target/checkout/ if you did not mvn clean in the meanwhile)

build javadoc:

 mvn site


Here we assume the version nr. of the current release is 3.0.7.
  cd target/site/
  mv apidocs/ api3.0.7
  tar czvf api3.0.3.tar.gz api3.0.7/
  scp api3.0.7.tar.gz username@cloudportal.open-bio.org:/home/websites/biojava.org/html/static/docs/

now log into the couldportal server:

 ssh andreas@cloudportal.open-bio.org
 
 cd /home/websites/biojava.org/html/static/docs/
 tar zxvf api3.0.7.tar.gz
 rm api
 ln -s api3.0.7 api

and back to your local machine...

=== Create the biojava-all bundle ===

If needed, rename your git checkout to bj3.0.7

 mv checkout/ bj3.0.7

remove .git files

 rm -rf .git .gitignore .travis.yml KEYS ignore.txt

Create -all tarball

 cd ..
 tar czvf bj3.0.7-all.tar.gz bj3.0.7
 
on portal.open-bio

 mkdir /home/websites/biojava.org/html/static/download/bj3.0.7

back to your local machine

 scp biojava-3.0.7-all.tar.gz andreas@cloudportal.open-bio.org:/home/websites/biojava.org/html/static/download/bj3.0.7

=== Javadocs ===

this is how to enable analytics in javadocs

 cd biojava-svn/target/bj3.0.7/

 mvn clean install source:jar javadoc:jar javadoc:aggregate

 cd biojava-svn/target/bj3.0.7/target/site/apidocs

upload apidocs

=== Update the wiki pages to link to the new release===

Create a new download file for the release. (I copied [[BioJava:Download_3.0.4]] to [[BioJava:Download_3.0.5]]). Modify the new page to the latest data.

Update [[BioJava:Download]] (Change the redirect on the BioJava:Download page to [[BioJava:Download_3.0.5]])

Update [[Template:Current version]], which should change all the references on the home page, sidebar, etc.

Double check that there are no additional references to the old version using an [http://biojava.org/w/index.php?title=Special%3ASearch&profile=advanced&fulltext=Search&ns0=1&ns4=1&redirs=1&search={{current version}} Advanced Search].

=== AND FINALLY ===

Write release announcement to biojava-l and biojava-dev