==BOSC2008 Abstract==

The abstract was submitted as appears below.  Please send an email to the biojava-dev mailing list with any further changes to be made.

[http://shore.net/~heuermh/BOSC2008_Abstract.odt BOSC2008_Abstract.odt]

[http://shore.net/~heuermh/BOSC2008_Abstract.pdf BOSC2008_Abstract.pdf]


===General information===

'''Paper Title:'''  BioJava Project Update

'''Student Paper?'''  No


===Author(s) Information===

====Author #1====
'''Name:'''  Michael Heuer

'''Organization:'''  Harbinger Partners, Inc.

'''Country:'''  USA

'''Email:'''

'''Additional Authors:'''

Richard Holland

Eagle Genomics Ltd.

UK


Thomas Down

Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute

UK


Matthew Pocock

University Newcastle Upon Tyne

UK


Andreas Prlic

Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

UK


David Huen

University of Cambridge

UK


Keith James

Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

UK


Sylvain Foisy

Laboratory in Genetics and Genomic Medicine of Inflammation

Montreal Heart Institute

Montreal, Québec

Canada


Andreas Dräger

Eberhard Karls University Tübingen

Center for Bioinformatics Tübingen (ZBIT)

Germany


Andy Yates

European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI)

UK


Mark Schreiber

Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases

Singapore

===Contact Author===

'''Contact Author:'''  Author #1

'''Alternate Email:''' xxx

'''Telephone:''' xxx


===Technical Areas===

Bio * Open Source Project Updates


===Content===

'''Keywords:'''

OBF O|B|F open-bio biojava bioperl biosql sequence alphabet feature annotation alignment protein structure phylogenetic trees


'''Abstract:'''

BioJava is a mature free and open-source project that provides a framework for processing biological data.  BioJava contains powerful analysis and statistical routines, tools for parsing common file formats, and packages for manipulating sequences and 3D structures.  BioJava is available freely under the terms of version 2.1 of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) from http://biojava.org/.  Here we present the latest BioJava release (version 1.6, released on 13 Apr 2008) which provides improvements in the packages for phylogenetic trees, processing PDB files, and genetic algorithms.


'''Paper:'''

BioJava Project Update


Holland, R.C.G.<sup>1</sup>, Down, T.<sup>2</sup>, Pocock, M.<sup>3</sup>, Prlic, A.<sup>4</sup>, Huen D.<sup>5</sup>, James K.<sup>4</sup>, Foisy, S.<sup>6</sup>, Dräger, A.<sup>7</sup>, Yates, A.<sup>8</sup>, Heuer M.<sup>9</sup>, and Schreiber, M.J.<sup>10</sup>


<sup>1</sup> Eagle Genomics Ltd., Cambridge, UK <sup>2</sup> Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK <sup>3</sup> University Newcaste Upon Tyne, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK <sup>4</sup> Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK <sup>5</sup> Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EH, UK <sup>6</sup> Laboratory in Genetics and Genomic Medicine of Inflammation, Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Québec, Canada. <sup>7</sup> Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Center for Bioinformatics (ZBIT), Germany <sup>8</sup> European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI), Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SD, UK <sup>9</sup> Harbinger Partners, Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota, USA <sup>10</sup> Novartis Institute for Tropical Diseases, 10 Biopolis Road, Chromos #05-01, Singapore 138670


BioJava was conceived in 1999 by Thomas Down and Matthew Pocock as an API to simplify bioinformatics software development using Java (Pocock et al., 2000). It has since then evolved to become a fully-featured framework with modules for performing many common bioinformatics tasks.


As a free and open-source project, BioJava is developed by volunteers coordinated by the Open Bioinformatics Foundation (O|B|F, http://open-bio.org/) and is one of several Bio* toolkits (Mangalam, 2002).  Over the past eight years, the BioJava has brought together nearly fifty different code contributors, hundreds of mailing list subscribers, and several wiki contributors.  All code and related documentation is distributed under version 2.1 of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL) license (Free Software Foundation, Inc., 1999).  All wiki documentation is made available online under version 1.2 of the GNU Free Documentation License (Free Software Foundation, Inc., 2000).


BioJava has been used in a number of real-world applications, including Bioclipse (Spjuth et al., 2007), BioWeka (Gewehr et al., 2007), Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003), and Taverna (Oinn et al., 2004), and has been referenced in over fifty published studies.  A list of these can be found on the BioJava website.


The latest BioJava release (version 1.6, released on 13 Apr 2008) offers more functionality and stability over the previous official releases.  The phylogenomics package was improved and expanded by our 2007 Google Summer of Code (GSOC'07) student Boh-Yun Lee. It now contains fully-functional Nexus and Phylip parsers, and tools for calculating UPGMA and Neighbour Joining, Jukes-Kantor and Kimura Two Parameter, and MP.  The PDB file parser was improved by Jules Jacobsen for better dealing with PDB header records. Andreas Dräger provided several patches for improving the genetic algorithm packages. The version 1.6 release also contains numerous bug fixes and documentation improvements.


The BioJava website is http://biojava.org/. The version 1.6 release can be downloaded from http://biojava.org/wiki/BioJava:Download.


'''References'''

Free Software Foundation, Inc. (1999) GNU Lesser General Public License, version 2.1, http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/lgpl-2.1.html, accessed 10 May 2008.

Free Software Foundation, Inc. (2000) GNU Free Documentation License, version 1.2, http://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.2.html, accessed 10 May 2008.

Gewehr JE, Szugat M, Zimmer R. (2007) BioWeka—extending the Weka framework for bioinformatics Bioinformatics 2007 23(5):651-653.

Mangalam H. (2002) The Bio* toolkits – a brief overview. Brief Bioinform., 3, 396-302.

Oinn T, Addis M, Ferris J, Marvin D, Greenwood M, Carver T, Pocock MR, Wipat A, Li P. (2004) Taverna: a tool for the composition and enactment of bioinformatics workflows. Bioinformatics, 20, 3045–3054.

Pocock M, Down T, Hubbard T. (2000) BioJava: Open Source Components for Bioinformatics. ACM SIGBIO Newsletter 20(2), 10-12.

Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, Ramage D, Amin N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T. (2003) Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Research 2003 Nov; 13(11):2498-504.

Spjuth O, Helmus T, Willighagen EL, Kuhn S, Eklund M, Wagener J, Murray-Rust P, Steinbeck C, Wikberg JE. (2007) Bioclipse: an open source workbench for chemo- and bioinformatics. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Feb 22;8:59.


==Notes==

'''Save for talk'''

As a mature project, BioJava faces several challenges:

how one deals with a large established code base

what happens when committers move on, get married, have kids, etc.

how difficult it is to deprecate and remove existing code

the BioJava3 use case & refactoring/redesign criteria gathering process

evolutionary vs. revolutionary changes

http://incubator.apache.org/learn/rules-for-revolutionaries.html

the "second system" problem

http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/fog0000000069.html


'''Version 1.6 release announcement to biojava-dev and biojava-l'''

Date: Sun, 13 Apr 2008 19:02:41 +0100<br/>
From: Andreas Prlic<br/>
To: biojava-dev at biojava.org, biojava-l at biojava.org<br/>
Subject: [Biojava-dev] biojava 1.6 released<br/>

Biojava 1.6 has been released and is available from http://
biojava.org/wiki/BioJava:Download

Biojava 1.6 offers more functionality and stability over the previous
official releases. BioJava now depends on Java 1.5+. We highly
recommend you to upgrade as soon as possible.

In detail, the phylo package org.biojavax.bio.phylo was improved and
expanded by our GSOC'07 student Boh-Yun Lee. It now contains fully-
functional Nexus and Phylip parsers, and tools for calculating UPGMA
and Neighbour Joining, Jukes-Kantor and Kimura Two Parameter, and MP.
It uses JGraphT to represent parsed trees.

The PDB file parser was improved by Jules Jacobsen for better dealing
with PDB header records. Andreas Draeger provided several patches for
improving the Genetic Algorithm modules. Additionally this release
contains numerous bug fixes and documentation improvements.

Thanks to the entire biojava community for making this possible!

Happy Biojava-ing,

Andreas


From [http://www.ohloh.net/projects/6798 http://www.ohloh.net/projects/6798]

'''As of 08 May 2008'''

181,197 lines of code in "biojava-live/trunk"

Estimated effort using COCOMO [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COCOMO] metric:  47 Person Years

48 contributors (committers with at least one commit to cvs and/or subversion repository)


also compare with:

BioJava StatSVN: [http://www.spice-3d.org/statsvn/stats/ http://www.spice-3d.org/statsvn/stats/]

top 10 authors:

<pre>
mrp  	114161 (25.5%)
thomasd 82637 (18.5%)
holland 58798 (13.1%)
kdj 	43546 (9.7%)
andreas 40727 (9.1%)
mark_s 	36616 (8.2%)
dhuen 	25610 (5.7%)
gcox 	5954 (1.3%)
birney 	4087 (0.9%)
draeger 3994 (0.9%)
</pre>

'''First commit'''

This commit was generated by cvs2svn to compensate for changes in r2,
which included commits to RCS files with non-trunk default branches.

by birney on 2000-01-26 15:53 (over 8 years ago)


Interesting to find out what happened before this administrative commit, as there were 6539 lines of code already.

Statsvn lists the files that were addded in the first commit:

<pre>
    4087 lines of code changed in:

        * org/biojava/bio: BioError.java (new 92), BioException.java (new 88)
        * org/biojava/bio/alignment: AbstractCursor.java (new), AbstractState.java (new 1), AbstractTrainer.java (new), Alignment.java (new 29), AmbiguityState.java (new), BaumWelchSampler.java (new), BaumWelchTrainer.java (new), Column.java (new), ComplementaryState.java (new), DNAState.java (new), DNAWeightMatrix.java (new), DP.java (new 10), DPCursor.java (new), DoubleAlphabet.java (new), EmissionState.java (new), FlatModel.java (new), IllegalTransitionException.java (new), MarkovModel.java (new), MarkovModelWrapper.java (new), MatrixCursor.java (new), ModelInState.java (new), ModelTrainer.java (new), SimpleAlignment.java (new 77), SimpleMarkovModel.java (new 3), SimpleModelInState.java (new), SimpleModelTrainer.java (new), SimpleState.java (new), SimpleStateLabeledSequence.java (new), SimpleStateTrainer.java (new), SimpleTransitionTrainer.java (new), SimpleWeightMatrix.java (new), SmallCursor.java (new), State.java (new), StateFactory.java (new), StateLabeledSequence.java (new), StateTrainer.java (new), StateWrapper.java (new), StoppingCriteria.java (new), SuffixTree.java (new 35), TrainerTransition.java (new), TrainingAlgorithm.java (new), Transition.java (new), TransitionTrainer.java (new), WMAsMM.java (new), WeightMatrix.java (new), WeightMatrixAnnotator.java (new 23), XmlMarkovModel.java (new)
        * org/biojava/bio/gui: BarLogoPainter.java (new 85), DNAStyle.java (new 84), LogoPainter.java (new 45), PlainStyle.java (new 56), ResidueStyle.java (new), StateLogo.java (new 7), TextLogoPainter.java (new 209)
        * org/biojava/bio/program: Meme.java (new 151)
        * org/biojava/bio/seq: AbstractAlphabet.java (new), AllSymbolsAlphabet.java (new), Alphabet.java (new 4), Annotatable.java (new 1), Annotation.java (new 2), Annotator.java (new 5), CompoundLocation.java (new 2), Feature.java (new 66), FeatureFactory.java (new), FeatureFilter.java (new 81), FeatureHolder.java (new 34), FixedWidthParser.java (new), HashSequenceDB.java (new 1), IllegalResidueException.java (new), Location.java (new 7), NameParser.java (new), PointLocation.java (new 2), RangeLocation.java (new), Residue.java (new), ResidueList.java (new), ResidueParser.java (new), SeqException.java (new), Sequence.java (new 63), SequenceDB.java (new), SequenceFactory.java (new 28), SequenceIterator.java (new 33), SimpleAlphabet.java (new), SimpleAnnotation.java (new), SimpleFeature.java (new 14), SimpleFeatureFactory.java (new), SimpleFeatureHolder.java (new 65), SimpleResidue.java (new 1), SimpleResidueList.java (new 2), SimpleSequence.java (new 1), SimpleSequenceFactory.java (new), SymbolParser.java (new)
        * org/biojava/bio/seq/io: DefaultDescriptionReader.java (new), EmblFormat.java (new 60), FastaDescriptionReader.java (new), FastaFormat.java (new 109), SequenceFormat.java (new 37), StreamReader.java (new 93), StreamWriter.java (new 50)
        * org/biojava/bio/seq/tools: AlphabetManager.java (new 1), DNATools.java (new)
        * org/biojava/stats/svm: LinearKernel.java (new 37), ListSumKernel.java (new 74), PolynomialKernel.java (new 89), RadialBaseKernel.java (new 67), SMORegressionTrainer.java (new 429), SMOTrainer.java (new 283), SVMKernel.java (new 39), SVMModel.java (new), SVMRegressionModel.java (new 170), SigmoidKernel.java (new 83), SparseVector.java (new 113), TrainingContext.java (new 31), TrainingEvent.java (new 39), TrainingListener.java (new 34)
        * org/biojava/stats/svm/tools: ClassifierExample.java (new 387), Classify.java (new 80), SVM_Light.java (new 199), Train.java (new 90), TrainRegression.java (new 86)
        * org/biojava/utils/xml: XMLDispatcher.java (new), XMLPeerBuilder.java (new), XMLPeerFactory.java (new)

</pre>




'''Latest commit'''

started to develop a mmcif parser

by Andreas.Prlic (Using name ‘andreas’) on 2008-04-28 07:27 (11 days ago)


'''BioJava group on LinkedIn'''

There is a BioJava group on LinkedIn:

Developers of the BioJava open-source bioinformatics project.

Not sure how to link to it though.

To join the BioJava linkedin group: You need to be a linkedin member. You then need to find the group and ask to join. I then get notified and asked to approve it, which I will if your name sounds vaguely familiar : ) You don't need to be a contributor just a user or interested party. --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 14:39, 22 May 2008 (UTC)

'''Wiki edits for later'''

Clarify reference to LGPL.

Update references to "open source" with "free and open source".  Link to FOSS page on wikipedia?

DengueInfo link on BioJavaInside is broken.

BioJava in Anger is now on the wiki (so under FDL?) but has a separate vague Copyright section, see http://biojava.org/wiki/BioJava:CookBook#Copyright

This copyright section is a direct copy from the old BioJava in Anger page. This means the statement is outdated and can probably be removed. --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 14:39, 22 May 2008 (UTC)