=Deploying an ensembl-das reference server=

This document describes the steps required to install a DAS reference server serving human genome data from an Ensembl-format SQL database. Ensembl-DAS is implemented as a plugin for the Dazzle server framework. If you are not familiar with Dazzle, it is recommended that you read the [[Dazzle:deployment|Dazzle deployment]] guide first.

==Prerequisites==

To run an Ensembl-DAS server, you will need to have the full Ensembl core database installed. There are some instructions for doing this here. Note that unless you actually want a local copy of the Ensembl website (or to use the Perl APIs directly) you don't need to install any of the Perl code. Ensembl-DAS uses pure Java APIs for accessing the database. You only need the core databases for the species you are interested in -- currently, no other databases are used.

===You will also need the following:===

    * A Java 2 runtime environment, version 1.4 or later
    * A Java servlet container. We recommend Tomcat 5.0.
    * A recent snapshot of BioJava.
    * Dazzle 1.00 or later
    * The biojava-ensembl bridge code
    * A Java database driver for MySQL, available from MySQL AB

The easiest way to get a server up and running is to download the latest ensembl-das webapp skeleton. This is based on the standard Dazzle skeleton, except that it contains biojava-ensembl code, including the ensembl-das plugins. You therefore just need to configure and deploy the application.

If you choose to build everything from source, note that the order of compilation is important: you must first compile dazzle, the ensure that dazzle.jar is available in your working directory (or on your CLASSPATH) when you compile biojava-ensembl, otherwise the ensembl-das plugins will not be compiled. When the biojava-ensembl build script starts up, it displays a message to tell you whether or not Dazzle has been detected.

==Basic configuration==

Like all Dazzle plugins, ensembl-das is configured by editing the dazzlecfg.xml file. A typical minimal configuration might look like:
<pre>
<dazzle xmlns="http://www.biojava.org/2000/dazzle">
  <resource id="hsa2134" jclass="org.ensembl.das.DatabaseHolder">
    <string name="dbURL" value="jdbc:mysql://noranti.derkholm.net/homo_sapiens_core_23_34e" />
    <string name="dbUser" value="ensembl" />
    <string name="dbPass" value="xxx" />
  </resource>


  <datasource id="hsa2134" jclass="org.ensembl.das.EnsemblCoreReference">
    <string name="name" value="Human" />
    <string name="description" value="The human genome assembly from Ensembl" />
    <string name="version" value="23.34" />

    <string name="coreHolder" value="connection_hsa_core_23_34" />
    <int name="schemaVersion" value="23" />

    <string name="ensemblWebURL" value="http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/" />
  </datasource>
</dazzle>
</pre>

Note that the database connection is not configured in the main datasource element, but in a separate resource element. This is to allow a single database connection to be shared between multiple DAS datasources.

The org.ensembl.das.DatabaseHolder resource type reflects a database connection. The dbURL property specifies the following information:

    * The type of database driver (MySQL)
    * The host name of the database server machine (e.g. noranti.derkholm.net)
    * The name of the Ensembl database (e.g. homo_sapiens_core_23_34e)

Having defined a database resource, configuring an EnsemblCoreReference datasource is fairly standard. Note the coreHolder property, which should be used to point to the appropriate database connection.

Once you are happy with your configuration, you should package everything as a .WAR file and deploy it as normal for your servlet container. If in doubt, consult the Dazzle deployment guide. As a first test, use a web browser to view the Dazzle status page, which will typically be:

    http://your-server:8080/das/ 

You could then try viewing the data source in a DAS client.

==Annotation servers==

==Protein DAS==

==SNPs==

==The Generic SeqFeature plugin==

The GenericSeqFeatureSource plugin is a general-purpose Dazzle plugin which allows features to be served up from an SQL database. The current version does not depend directly on any Ensembl code or databases, but it is distributed alongside the ensembl-das plugins described above, and has historically been popular with Ensembl users

To serve a new dataset, create a MySQL database and add one or more tables matching the following schema:
<pre>
CREATE TABLE my_feature ( 
  contig_id    varchar(40) NOT NULL default '', 
  start        int(10) NOT NULL default '0',
  end          int(10) NOT NULL default '0', 
  strand       int(2) NOT NULL default '0', 
  id           varchar(40) NOT NULL default '', 
  score        double(16,4) NOT NULL default '0.0000', 
  gff_feature  varchar(40) default NULL, 
  gff_source   varchar(40) default NULL,
  name         varchar(40) default NULL, 
  hstart       int(11) NOT NULL default '0',
  hend         int(11) NOT NULL default '0',
  hid          varchar(40) NOT NULL default'',
  evalue       varchar(40) default NULL,
  perc_id      int(10) default NULL, 
  phase        int(11) NOT NULL default '0', 
  end_phase    int(11) NOT NULL default '0',
  
  KEY id_contig(contig_id), 
  KEY id_pos(id,start,end) 
); 
</pre>

A single database can contain many datasets, each in its own table. Each dataset is served by a separate instance of the GenericSeqFeatureSource plugin, but they can share a single pool of database connections, therefore reducing the load on your database server if you want to serve up a large number of datasets.

The most important columns are:

<pre>
contig_id    The name of the sequence to which a feature is attached (may actually be a contig, clone, or chromosome name).
start    The minimum sequence position covered by the feature
end    The maximum position covered by the feature
strand    The strand of the feature (should be -1, 0, or 1).
id    A unique ID for each feature
gff_feature    The "type" of the feature
gff_source    The "source" of the feature (e.g. the name of the program which performed the analysis)
</pre>

For many purposes, the remaining fields can be left with their default values.

A typical configuration looks like:
<pre>
<dazzle xmlns="http://www.biojava.org/2000/dazzle">
  <resource id="generic_db" jclass="org.ensembl.das.DatabaseHolder">
    <string name="dbURL" value="jdbc:mysql://noranti.derkholm.net/generic_features" />
    <string name="dbUser" value="ensembl" />
    <string name="dbPass" value="xxx" />
  </resource>


  <datasource id="somefeatures" jclass="org.ensembl.das.GenericSeqFeatureSource">
    <string name="name" value="Some features" />
    <string name="description" value="Some features which I think are really interesting" />
    <string name="version" value="1" />
    
    <string name="mapMaster" value="http://noranti.derkholm.net/das/hsa2334/">

    <string name="dbHolder" value="generic_db" />
    <string name="tableName" value="my_feature" />
  </datasource>
</dazzle>
</pre>

If the features in your database have unique IDs, it is easy to add links to other web pages. For example:
<pre>
  <datasource id="somefeatures" jclass="org.ensembl.das.GenericSeqFeatureSource">
    <string name="name" value="Some features" />
    <string name="description" value="Some features which I think are really interesting" />
    <string name="version" value="1" />
    
    <string name="mapMaster" value="http://noranti.derkholm.net/das/hsa2334/">

    <string name="dbHolder" value="generic_db" />
    <string name="tableName" value="my_feature" />
    
    <map name="uriPatterns">
      <string name="test_link" value="http://www.example.org/exciting_features.jsp?id=####;format=table">
    </map>
  </datasource>
</pre>

It is possible to provide several links for each feature, so long as you give them unique names. For each feature, the #### string in the pattern is replaced by the feature ID from the database.