===Dazzle & plugin installation in Eclipse===

Instructions how to run [[Dazzle|Dazzle]] in Eclipse using the Web Standard Tools.

== required plugins ==
To run Dazzle in Eclipse make sure you have the following eclipse plugins installed or you download a version of eclipse with these plugins already such as a Java EE eclipse version or sometimes labelled Server/Web version (e.g. [http://www.eclipse.org/downloads/download.php?file=/technology/epp/downloads/release/ganymede/SR1/eclipse-jee-ganymede-SR1-macosx-carbon.tar.gz Ganymede] or [http://www.easyeclipse.org/site/distributions/index.html EasyEclipse]):

 WST - the [http://www.eclipse.org/webtools/wst/main.php Web Standard Tools project]
 Subclipse - the [http://subclipse.tigris.org/ subversion plugin for eclipse]

 For WST make sure to have your Tomcat/Resin server configured correctly as a Server in Eclipse.

== Step 1 check out Dazzle ==

Check out the Dazzle code from Subversion as a new Java Project.

== Step 2 create a new Dynamic Web Project ==

This project will provide your Dazzle plugin. Let's call it "mydazzle" for this example.

== Step 3 configure new project ==

Configure the dependencies of "mydazzle".
 ->right mouse click ->preferences -> J2EE Module Dependencies
 select Dazzle, biojava-live
 add the .jar files from biojava-live/

 ->right mouse click ->preferences -> Java Build Path 
    ->Projects
     select Dazzle and biojava-live
    ->Libraries
     add the .jar files from Dazzle/dazzle-weball/WEB-INF/lib
     (but not dazzle.jar, that one is being take care of by the J2EE dependency

== Step 3 copy files ==

Copy the files from the Dazzle/dazzle-webapp subdirectory into you Dynamic web project / WebContent/

Copy the Dazzle/dazzle-webapp/WEB-INF/web.xml to your Dynamic web project / WebContent/WEB-INF/web.xml

== Step 5 start dynamic web project ==

Right mouse click on the dynamic web project-> run on server.

This will start your project on the server

To create a new plugin, simply edit the Java source code in your dynamic web project. Don't forget
to also include your new DAS source in the <b>dazzlecfg.xml</b> file.