==Welcome to BioJava==
See the [http://biojava.open-bio.org/news BioJava news page] for BioJava news.

== About BioJava ==

BioJava is an [[wp:Open source|open-source]] project dedicated to providing a [http://www.java.sun.com Java] framework for processing biological data. It include objects for manipulating biological sequences, file parsers, [http://biodas.org/ DAS] client and server suport, access to [http://www.biosql.org/ BioSQL] and [http://www.ensembl.org Ensembl] databases, tools for making sequence analysis GUIs and powerful analysis and statistical routines including a dynamic programming toolkit.

BioJava is used in several real-world [[Project:BioJavaInside|bioinformatics applications]] and has been used for bioinformatics analysis in a number of [[Project:BioJavaInside|published studies]].

== Getting BioJava ==

BioJava is distributed under the terms of the GNU [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html Lesser GPL]. This means that you can use the libraries without your software being forced under either the LGPL or [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html GPL]. LGPL is not GPL. 

BioJava releases can be obtained from our [[Project:download|download]] area. Instructions for installing the library, and building source releases, can be found on the [[Project:GetStarted|Getting started]] page. 

You can also maintain an up-to-date view of BioJava with [http://www.cvs.org/ CVS]. Additionally, we provide an [http://cvs.biojava.org/ anonymous CVS] server. If you wish to contribute your existing code or help maintain part of the BioJava code-base, then we can supply you with a read/write account. Sign up for the [http://www.biojava.org/mailman/listinfo/biojava-dev biojava-dev mailing list] and post a request for an account.

==BioJava 1.5 Release Planning==
Planning has begun for a new BioJava release. The [[Project:1.5ReleasePlan|release plan]] has been drawn up. Soon we will be asking for a volunteer to be the [[Czar|Release Czar]] to oversee the coordination of the release.



== Documentation ==

=== Cookbook ===

The biojava project maintains a cookbook of examples that help you perform common tasks and get you started using biojava. The cookbook is affectionately known as [[BioJava:Cookbook|Biojava in Anger]]. A [[BioJava:CookbookFrench|French version]] is also available.

=== API Documentation (JavaDocs) ===

The following are links to API documentation autogenerated by javadoc.

* [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api/index.html API docs (BioJava version 1.3)]
* [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api14/index.html API docs (BioJava version 1.4)]

=== BioJava Tutorial ===

The BioJava tutorial is [[BioJava:Tutorial|here]]

=== BioJavaX Documentation ===

This documentation is just as much under development as the code it refers to, so use with care. It is a rough guide rather than a detailed description.

* [[BioJava:BioJavaXDocs|BioJavaX Documentation (translated from the original DocBook format)]]

=== Dazzle ===

The Dazzle DAS server repository and documentation has been moved to a new [http://www.derkholm.net/thomas/dazzle/ location]

== Thanks ==
 

The [http://www.open-bio.org/ open-bio] servers reside in in a Tier 1 Boston area colocation  
facility.
Infrastructure geeks can see pictures of the colocation cage and the  
new OBF servers online at this URL:
[http://bioteam.net/gallery/bioteamBDC]  -- those servers also host  
EMBOSS FTP/CVS and mailing lists.

We would like to thank Chris Dagdigian from [http://www.bioteam.net/ The Bioteam] for providing and maintaining the bio* servers.


Please see [http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_i18n documentation on customizing the interface]
and the [http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_User%27s_Guide User's Guide] for usage and configuration help.