== Prerequisite ==

* Make sure you have a copy of the latest eclipse (Galileo)

* Make sure you have Java 1.6 installed. (if you are on oSX 10.4.x install [http://landonf.bikemonkey.org/static/soylatte/ soylatte]

* Install the  [http://m2eclipse.sonatype.org/ m2eclipse] Maven eclipse plugin. Be sure to include SCM integration, offered through the m2eclipse-extras package.

* Install the [http://subclipse.tigris.org/ subclipse] plugin for subversion (latest version: 1.6)

== Installation ==

* In the SVN Repository Exploring view: Right click on the folder <i>/biojava/biojava-live/trunk</i> and select Check  Out as Maven project


= Details for specific Eclipse Versions ==

=== Update for Eclipse Helios SR2 (May 2011) ===

The above plugins are still available and work fine, however, below are the few important particulars. 

* Use update URLs from the plugins web site, do not use Eclipse market place, as in that case you will have to install all the components of the plugin manually and it will be very easy to forget to install something important, besides it does not always work. 

* Make sure you have full JDK 1.6 installed, JRE will not be sufficient (some ''Maven'' plugins will not work)

* After JDK installation point Eclipse to the JDK location. For this edit ''eclipse.ini'' found in the Eclipse root directory. Insert ''-vm'' keyword with the location of your JDK and make sure that this keyword precedes ''-vmargs'' (!) for example

   -vm
   C:/Java/jdk1.6.23/bin
   -vmargs
   -Xms40m
   -Xmx512m

* If you work on any other operating system but win32, you will have to install JavaHL library for the ''subclipse'' plugin manually. More information about it can be found here: [http://subclipse.tigris.org/wiki/JavaHL http://subclipse.tigris.org/wiki/JavaHL]

* When adding the URL of BioJava development repository do not add the actual folder you want to check out, otherwise you may not be able to checkout it as maven project. For example if you want to checkout 
 svn+ssh://dev.open-bio.org/home/svn-repositories/biojava/biojava-live/trunk/
use 
 svn+ssh://dev.open-bio.org/home/svn-repositories/biojava/biojava-live

as the repository URL and then navigate to trunk in the Eclipse SVN explorer.

=== Eclipse Indigo (August 29th 2011) ===

I downloaded the Eclipse j2ee version (OSX Lion) and used the Eclipse Marketplace to find and install the following plugins:

 -subclipse 
 -m2eclipse extras (SVN team integration)
 -m2eclipse (seems to have been automatically installed..?)
 -SvnKit Client Adapter (from Yoxos Marketplace, needs to be switched in Preferences->Team->SVN, SVN Interface ->SVNKit, Pure Java )
--[[User:Andreas|Andreas]] 04:43, 30 August 2011 (UTC)