== What needs starting? ==

* BioJavaX docbook need converting to Wiki - quite hard
* Conversion of cookbook and tutorials to reflect 1.4 (and/or BioJavax) conventions - requires someone with in-depth knowledge of the complete workings of BioJava
* Consolidate cookbook, tutorials and BJX docbook into a single HowTo - time-consuming, might as well just write a book!
* Related sites eg bioperl, biopython etc - easy, could use interwiki

== Whats in progress? ==
* Choosing a logo!
* CookBook (BioJava in Anger) Portuguese version --[[User:Guedes|Guedes]] 06:50, 12 April 2006 (EDT)

== Whats done already? ==
* About BioJava
* Getting BioJava
* Thanks
* Getting Started (Done --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 12:49, 6 February 2006 (EST))
* CookBook (BioJava in Anger English version) - Done --[[User:Guedes|Guedes]] 14:34, 8 February 2006 (EST)
* CookBook (BioJava in Anger French Version) - Done --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 15:00, 14 February 2006 (EST)
* JavaDoc 1.3 - how? link back to old? Links to old established --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 12:13, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* JavaDoc 1.4 - how? link back to old? Links to old established --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 12:13, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* Hackers Guide - Done --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 16:37, 6 February 2006 (EST)
* Download 1.3 - Done -- [[User:Martin|Martin]] 12:18, 7 February 2006 (EST)
* Download 1.4 - Done -- [[User:Martin|Martin]] 12:18, 7 February 2006 (EST)		 
* CVS access - Unnecessary -- links to CVS and WebCVS are already in [[BioJava:GetStarted]]-- [[User:Rholland|Rholland]] 14:51, 8 February 2006 (SGT)
* WebCVS - Unnecessary -- links to CVS and WebCVS are already in [[BioJava:GetStarted]]-- [[User:Rholland|Rholland]] 14:51, 8 February 2006 (SGT)
* Mailing list pages --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 07:17, 23 February 2006 (EST)
* Participants --[[User:Mark|Mark]] 07:17, 23 February 2006 (EST)
* Tutorial - laborious but straightforward, some parts are in need of updating and/or are no longer relevant (Formatting is done -- [[User:Martin|Martin]] 21:02, 12 February 2006 (EST))

== Inspiration ==

If you don't know the best way to do it take a look at the [[bp:Main_Page|bioperl]] home page for inspiration.

Also try looking at the [[bp:Style_guide|bioperl style guide]] for hints on making links etc