This page offers downloads for the <b>BioJava Legacy 1.8 release</b>. 

BioJava Legacy 1.8 requires <b>Java 1.5</b> or later. 

== About ==
BioJava legacy 1.8 has been released and is available using Maven from http://biojava.org/download/maven/

Over the last year BioJava has undergone a major re-write. A new code base has been started under the codename [[BioJava:Download|BioJava 3]]. The old BioJava code (or BioJava 1 or BioJava Legacy) has been modularized into small, re-usable components and is available for download on this page.

== Maven Download ==
BioJava Legacy 1.8 requires [http://maven.apache.org/ Maven] for the build process. We are providing a BioJava specific Maven repository at http://biojava.org/download/maven/ .

You can add the BioJava repository by adding the following XML to your project .pom file:
<pre>
	<repositories>
		...
		<repository>
			<id>biojava-maven-repo</id>
			<name>BioJava repository</name>
			<url>http://www.biojava.org/download/maven/</url>			
		</repository>
	</repositories>
</pre>

== Manual Download ==
{|
|+
! Module
! Binary Jar
! Source Jar
! Javadoc Jar
|-
| alignment 
| [http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/alignment/1.8/alignment-1.8.jar  alignment-1.8.jar] 
| [http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/alignment/1.8/alignment-1.8-sources.jar  alignment-1.8-sources.jar] 
| [http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/alignment/1.8/alignment-1.8-javadoc.jar  alignment-1.8-javadoc.jar]
|-
| biosql 
| [http://http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/biosql/1.8/biosql-1.8.jar biosql-1.8.jar] 
| [http://http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/biosql/1.8/biosql-1.8-sources.jar biosql-1.8-sources.jar] 
| [http://http://biojava.org/download/maven/org/biojava/biosql/1.8/biosql-1.8-javadoc.jar biosql-1.8-javadoc.jar]

|}


=== Support libraries ===

*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/bytecode.jar bytecode.jar]: Required to run biojava
*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/commons-cli.jar commons-cli.jar]: Only required to compile and use some of the demos
*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/commons-collections-2.1.jar commons-collections-2.1.jar]: only required for some demos and BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)
*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar commons-dbcp-1.1.jar]: Only required for legacy BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)
*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/commons-pool-1.1.jar commons-pool-1.1.jar]: Only required for legacy BioSQL access (and building biojava.jar)
*  [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/support-jars/jgrapht-jdk1.5.jar jgrapht-jdk1.5.jar]: Only required for NEXUS file parsing (and building biojava.jar)

== Source download ==

The jar file containing the source code is available from [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/src/biojava-1.7.1-src.jar biojava-1.7.1-src.jar] (6.1Mb). This provides the same directory structure as is available from a SVN checkout of the project, including .jar file dependencies.

== Documentation ==

Documentation is available via [http://www.biojava.org/download/bj171/doc/biojava-1.7.1-doc.jar biojava-1.7.1-doc.jar] (11Mb) that includes the javadocs for the API, demos and apps. For some browsers, right click and select "Save Link As".

You can also browse the documentation at [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api171/ BioJava 1.7.1 api]

==Release Date==
BioJava 1.7.1 has been released on January 15th, 2008.

== Getting older versions ==

* The legacy release of 1.7 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.7|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.6 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.6|here]] (requires Java 1.5+)
* The legacy release of 1.5 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.5|here]] (requires Java 1.4.2+)
* The legacy release of 1.4 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.4|here]]
* The legacy release 1.3 can be found [[BioJava:Download 1.3|here]].
* Older releases of BioJava can be found in the [http://www.biojava.org/download/ download area].