by '''[mailto:bioinformatics@CambridgeAntibody.com Cambridge Antibody Technology]'''

== Introduction ==

This tutorial covers the use of the Blast-like parsing framework to generate HTML representations of the Blast-like XML.

Here are some examples of the type of output you can generate.

* [http://www.biojava.org/tutorials/blastlikeParsingCookBook/blastp.html Blastp]
* [http://www.biojava.org/tutorials/blastlikeParsingCookBook/blastp.html Blastn]

Prerequisites are:

* an upto date copy of biojava 
* the programs in the demos directory 

== Running the demos ==

To generate for yourself the above example HTML files, change directory to the demos directory of biojava. The following commands will generate the HTML to standard out:

<pre>java eventbasedparsing.Blast2HTML nucleic files/ncbiblast/blastn.out
java eventbasedparsing.Blast2HTML protein files/ncbiblast/blastp.out</pre>

You can choose an output file ( instead of redirecting standard out ) by adding a third argument to the command:

<pre>java eventbasedparsing.Blast2HTML protein files/ncbiblast/blastp.out blastp.html</pre>

== Customising the Output ==

The HTMLRenderer constructor takes several parameters which allow customisation of the HTML. 

* '''Style sheet''': You can change the definition of the styles in the style sheet. 
* '''Alignment width''': The alignment width simply specifies the number of bases/residues per alignment block. 
* '''URLGeneratorFactory''': Returns a List of DatabaseURLGenerators. These are used to convert database ID's to URL's and links. You can create your own. See NcbiDatabaseURLGenerator for an example. 
* '''AlignmentMarker''': Delegates most of it's operations to the ColourCommand and AlignmentStyler.
** ColourCommand: Controls whether a pair of characters in the alignment are styled or not. 
** AlignmentStyler: Decides what style to apply to any given pair of characters. 

E.g. To markup mismatches in red you would have a ColourCommand that decides only mismatches are coloured, and then an AlignmentStyler that colours any characters passed to it as red.

There are a couple of implementations of AlignmentStyler: SimpleAlignmentStyler and BlastMatrixAlignmentStyler - see the Javadocs for details. 

Of course you can also use custom handlers to only pass on a subset of the output. 

{{Tutorial:Footer}}