== Introduction ==

BioJava will run on any computer with a Java virtual machine complying to the Java 2 Standard Edition (J2SE) 1.4 (or later) specifications. Java implementations for Linux, Windows, and Solaris are available to download from Sun's java website. Recent versions of MacOS X include a suitable Java implementation as standard. Java is also available on many other platforms: if in doubt, contact your vendor.

BioJava binaries are distributed in .jar (Java ARchive) format. You can always get the latest release version in the binaries directory of the download area. You will also need:

    * bytecode-0.92.jar
    * commons-cli.jar
    * commons-collections-2.1.jar
    * commons-dbcp-1.1.jar
    * commons-pool-1.1.jar

== Installation ==

None of these .jar files need to be unpacked for normal use -- simply place them in a convenient directory.

To use BioJava, add the required JAR files to your CLASSPATH environment variable. The exact syntax varies between platforms. The text is wrapped due to limited space. The actual commands should be on a single line:

=== UNIX Bourne-type shells (the default with most Linux distributions and MacOS 10.3) ===

 export CLASSPATH=/home/thomas/biojava.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode-0.92.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== UNIX C-type shell (for example: versions of Mac OS X pre-10.3)===

 setenv CLASSPATH /home/thomas/biojava.jar:/home/thomas/bytecode-0.92.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-cli.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-collections-2.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-dbcp-1.1.jar:
                         /home/thomas/commons-pool-1.1.jar:.

=== Windows from command line ===

 set CLASSPATH C:\biojava.jar;C:\bytecode-0.92.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;.

=== Windows autoexec.bat files ===

 set CLASSPATH=C:\biojava.jar;C:\bytecode-0.92.jar;C:\commons-cli.jar;
                         C:\commons-collections-2.1.jar;C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;
                         C:\commons-dbcp-1.1.jar;.

It is also possible to "install" JAR files onto your system by copying them into your Java installation's extensions directory. On most Unix systems, this is named ${JAVA_HOME}/jre/lib/ext. On Mac OS X there is a per-user extensions directory called ~/Library/Java/Extensions (you may have to create this directory yourself). For other platforms, consult your Java vendor.

You can now compile and run BioJava programs using the javac and java commands. You might like to look at the tutorial and API documentation, and try the demo programs included in the source distribution (see below).