Why dont we give a list of publications ? 
I think we should give pdf link of the publications from personal pages of the authours -- 
--[[User:S Khadar|S Khadar]] 15:13, 6 February 2006 (EST)

Hi - I moved your entry in the Discussion section since it might generate comments that are outside the scope of the CookBook. Actually your idea is quite interesting. Why not make a page with some of the papers that were created using BioJava and come back to the Cookbook page and add the link? --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 15:19, 6 February 2006 (EST)


Hi - I've searched for anything about this and found the followings:

http://www.google.com.br/search?as_q=using+Biojava&num=10&hl=pt-BR&btnG=Pesquisa+Google&as_epq=&as_oq=&as_eq=&lr=&as_ft=i&as_filetype=pdf&as_qdr=all&as_occt=any&as_dt=i&as_sitesearch=&as_rights=&safe=images

--[[User:Guedes|Guedes]] 15:43, 6 February 2006 (EST)

Hi- That's the link that I have put in the french version: http://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=biojava&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&hl=en. My suggestion is to create  a page where some representative apps created using BioJava could be showcased.
--[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 15:58, 6 February 2006 (EST)


What do people think about the links to STRAP here?
this are links out to their web site. No content in this wiki is provided and it does not feel like the BioJava cookbook page
is the right place for this. Perhaps this should better be moved
to the [[BioJava:BioJavaInside|applications that are based on biojava page]]? --[[User:Andreas|Andreas]] 18:39, 21 January 2008 (EST)

Hi gang ;-) Andreas has a good point. The goals of the cookbook is to show people how to use BioJava to create their own solutions. STRAP is good stuff but it goes beyond BioJava and stands on its own. I vote yea on this.

=== Links to Javadoc ===
Another point: I saw that Andreas has added links to the javadocs on some cookbook examples. I have not modified the french version yet but I think that this is a good thing for all pages. Should we make this SOP for cookbook recipes? I volunteer for the french cookbook but I would appreciate some help if I dive into the english version... --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 10:45, 23 January 2008 (EST)

Only thing that worries me is that if we have a new release of biojava, 
the javadoc location changes. I just created a symbolic link on the web server. 
from now on [http://www.biojava.org/docs/api/ http://www.biojava.org/docs/api/]  will always point to the latest version of the BioJava api, so all wiki links should use that rather than .../docs/api16/ --[[User:Andreas|Andreas]] 10:50, 23 January 2008 (EST)

Good point ;-). I'll start using this from now on. --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 11:50, 23 January 2008 (EST)

=== Cookbook SOP ===

While we are at it, should we start thinking about a SOP for writing recipes? I know that I have tried to stick to a common style for the french version (like classes in italic) but it would be nice if we worked toward some kind of standard... --[[User:Foisys|Foisys]] 11:50, 23 January 2008 (EST)