== BioJava at BOSC/ISMB 2009 ==

Hi,

I would like to submit an abstract to BOSC 2009 for BioJava and organize a BioJava user meeting around ISMB. This page will be used to prepare this.
--[[User:Andreas|Andreas]] 00:35, 18 March 2009 (UTC)

Deadline:
Monday, April 13: Abstract deadline

Structure:

    * Title
    * Authors, with the presenting author's name underlined.
    * Author affiliations, including the e-mail address of the presenting author.
    * URL for the overall project web site
    * URL for accessing the code
    * The particular Open Source License being used 
    * Abstract


== Abstract ==
=== BioJava 2009:  an Open-Source Framework for Bioinformatics===

'''Authors''':
''A.  Prlić,  T. Down; A. Dräger; S. Foisy; D. Huen; J. Jacobsen, K. James;  M. Heuer;   M. Pocock;  M.J. Schreiber; G. Waldon; A. Yates; R.C.G. Holland;
''

 The BioJava website is http://biojava.org/. 

 The version 1.7 release can be downloaded from ...

 BioJava is available under the terms of version 2.1 of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL).

BioJava is a mature open-source project that provides a framework for processing of biological data. BioJava contains powerful analysis and statistical routines, tools for parsing common file formats, and packages for manipulating sequences and 3D structures. It enables rapid bioinformatics application development in the Java programming language. Here we present the latest BioJava release (version 1.7, released in Apr 2009).

Besides numerous bug fixes and stability improvements, a lot of development has been going on in the protein structure modules. BioJava now provides a  framework for parsing mmCif files. The parsing of PDB header information has been improved and a new tool to read the Chemical component dictionary is in place. 

An ongoing project is the open sourcing of the RCSB protein structure viewers. These have been made available as open source as a stand-alone project. Work is currently under way to provide a more close integration with BioJava. 
 

==Content for talk==


 * what can you do with BioJava / available modules
 * BioJava 3 status (Richard ?) 
 * usage analysis from google analytics
 * new 3D viewers is BioJava svn (to be announced yet)


from [http://www.spice-3d.org/statsvn/stats/ http://www.spice-3d.org/statsvn/stats/]

<pre>
some author stats:
Author  	Lines of Code
mrp 		114161 (24.3%)
thomasd 	82637 (17.6%)
holland 	59306 (12.6%)
andreas 	55791 (11.9%)
kdj 		43546 (9.3%)
mark_s 		36623 (7.8%)
dhuen 		25610 (5.5%)
draeger 	8874 (1.9%)
gcox 		5954 (1.3%)
birney 		4087 (0.9%)
</pre>

Author affiliations might be copied with changes from last year's abstract, in the revision history at [[BOSC2008_Abstract]].

== BioJava user meeting at ISMB ==

Location and time to be announced later