==BioJava starting to use SVN==


Over the next weeks (until Christmas) BioJava will finally move the version control system from 
CVS to Subversion (svn).  This is happening in parallel to the other open-bio projects. We will 
ensure that nothing gets lost during this migration. This means that all Biojava modules, branches 
and tags and the history of the files will be imported into the new repository.

===Steps during the migration process===

Over the next weeks we will

A) Test the migration procedure to ensure nothing gets lost

B) We will declare a CVS freeze at a certain date (giving you enough time to commit all your latest changes to CVS). At this point we will also do a quick BioJava release (version 1.5.1)

C) After the freeze the final svn migration will happen

D) from that moment on all future Biojava development will happen via svn, CVS will remain frozen.


Detailed instructions for how to check out and commit code to svn will be announced closer to the migration date.

==Progress Status==

=== Testing the migration procedure ===

The testing phase has finished. 

This procedure will be used for the conversion: (a hack of cvs2svn)
[http://hoopajoo.net/misc/converting_to_svn.html]

Thanks to George Hartzell for doing the actual conversion.

To test the svn dump [http://www.statsvn.org/ statsvn] is being run on the whole repository. This allows to check if the history has been converted correctly and if there are any problems within the repository.



==== Problems found during testing phase ====

A few problems have been found:

===== Attic files =====
These six files caused problems:
<pre>
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/ResultPrinter.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/ResultPrinter.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/SSAHASeq.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/SSAHASeq.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/CreateDNAFastaHashTable.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/CreateDNAFastaHashTable.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/SSAHA.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/SSAHA.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/CreateEmblHashTable.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/CreateEmblHashTable.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both
  biojava/biojava-live/src/org/biojava/bio/annodb/IndexedAnnotationDB.java,v
  and
  biojava/biojava-live/src/org/biojava/bio/annodb/Attic/IndexedAnnotationDB.java,v
</pre>

Here's a reference that discusses the issue:

  http://cvs2svn.tigris.org/faq.html#atticprob

To resolve this problems the files in the Attic subdirectory are getting removed and not being imported to SVN


===== Upper case / lower case problems =====

There are a few files in the repository that have a upper case / lower case file name clash with another file.
To resolve this they are going to be renamed.
<pre>
/biojava-live/branches/mattandtom/src/org/biocorba 
/biojava-live/branches/mattandtom/src/org/biojava/bridge/biocorba 
/biojava-draft/biojava-live/tags/biojava/src/org/biocorba 
/biojava-live/tags/biojava/src/org/biojava/bridge/biocorba
</pre>



===== Escape characters in log statements =====

svn log -v --xml gives this error message:

svn log: An invalid XML character (Unicode: 0x1b) was found in the element content of the document.

this seems to be a bug in SVN:
http://subversion.tigris.org/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=2866

after manually removing the 2 escape characters from the log statements
svn log -v --xml works fine.

=== CVS freeze ===

The date for the final CVS freeze will be announced several days before the freeze. Early warnings on the biojava mailing lists
should give enough time for all developers to commit their current developments.

After the CVS freeze we will also do a (minor) BioJava release. This will be BioJava version 1.5.1

=== Final migration to SVN ===

waiting for CVS freeze first.

=== how future checkouts might look like ===

It is not yet fully set in stone, but the current plan is to use SVN via ssh. 
This means a future BioJava checkout (for a developer) might look like this:

 svn co svn+ssh://somewhere.open-bio.org/path/not/sure/biojava-live/trunk ./biojava-live

after initial checkout, you can change into the local ./biojava-live directory and execute SVN commands without the URL. For example:

 svn update
 svn commit -m "comments for this commit"
 svn add myfile.java

If your local user name is different from the one one the open-bio server you can edit

 ~/.ssh/config

and add
 
 host dev.open-bio.org
 user blablabla

see also the [http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/SVN-Developers SVN developers page in the OBF wiki]


We will also continue to provide anonymous checkouts and a browsable interface to the repository