==Welcome to BioJava==
See the [http://biojava.open-bio.org/news BioJava news page] for BioJava news.

This site is built by the biojava community. We are currently in the process of moving the old biojava site to this site. Click [[Project:ToDo|here]] for a todo list.


== About BioJava ==

BioJava is an [[wp:Open source|open-source]] project dedicated to providing a [http://www.java.sun.com Java] framework for processing biological data. It include objects for manipulating biological sequences, file parsers, [http://biodas.org/ DAS] client and server suport, access to [http://www.biosql.org/ BioSQL] and [http://www.ensembl.org Ensembl] databases, tools for making sequence analysis GUIs and powerful analysis and statistical routines including a dynamic programming toolkit.

== Getting BioJava ==

BioJava is distributed under the terms of the GNU [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html Lesser GPL]. This means that you can use the libraries without your software being forced under either the LGPL or [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html GPL]. LGPL is not GPL. 

BioJava releases can be obtained from our [[Project:download|download]] area. Instructions for installing the library, and building source releases, can be found on the [[Project:GetStarted|Getting started]] page. 

You can also maintain an up-to-date view of BioJava with [http://www.cvs.org/ CVS]. We provide anonymous [[wp:Concurrent Versions System|CVS]] server. If you wish to contribute your existing code or help maintain part of the BioJava code-base, then we can supply you with a read/write account. Sign up for the biojava-dev mailing list and post a request for an account.


== New Logo Needed! ==

The BioJava project needs a new Logo. The sunflower in the top left corner of this page doesn't really do it justice. If you have artistic flair then upload you logo to this [[Project:logo|page]]. Everyone feel free to make your comments about which ones you like. At some as yet undecided point one will become the official logo.
--[[User:Mark|Mark]] 21:21, 1 February 2006 (EST)


'''4 New Logos available for evaluation here [[Project:logo|page]] '''--[[User:S Khadar|S Khadar]] 10:16, 6 February 2006 (EST) SK

== Cookbook ==

BioJava can be both big and intimidating. For those of us who are in a hurry there really is a whole lot there to get your head around. This document is designed to help you develop BioJava programs that do 99% of common tasks without needing to read and understand 99% of the BioJava API.

The page was inspired by various programming cookbooks and follows a "How do I...?" type approach. Each "How do I?" is linked to some example code that does what you want and sometimes more. Basically if you find the code you want and copy and paste it into your program you should be up and running quickly. I have endeavoured to over document the code to make it more obvious what I am doing so some of the code might look a bit bloated. Go [[Biojava:Cookbook|here]] to view the cookbook.

'BioJava in Anger' is maintained by [[User:Mark|Mark Schreiber]]. If you have any suggestions, questions or comments contact the [mailto:biojava-l@biojava.org biojava mailing list]. To subscribe to this list go [http://biojava.org/mailman/listinfo/biojava-l here]

== Thanks ==
 

The [http://www.open-bio.org/ open-bio] servers reside in Cambridge, Massachusetts USA with colocation facilities and internet bandwidth donated by [http://www.wyeth.com/ Wyeth] Research. We would like to thank Chris Dagdigian from [http://www.bioteam.net/ The Bioteam] for maintaining the bio* servers.


Please see [http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_i18n documentation on customizing the interface]
and the [http://meta.wikipedia.org/wiki/MediaWiki_User%27s_Guide User's Guide] for usage and configuration help.