'''Goal 1:''' 

Create a function that can accept two strings (x, y).
The function should then locate the overlap of the end of x with the
beginning of y.<br> 
The function should return the non-overlapping start of x
If x does not match the first length(x) characters of y, then return x.
The minimum overlap should be 5 or more characters. 


'''Goal 2:'''

The function should be nicely wrapped up to accept a file, from the command line, that has two columns.

The resulting program should accept the file, feeding the function
with each element from the column and print the result to either an out
file or a standard output.

Example Command:

   java FindEnds inputFile.txt outputFile.txt

'''Goal 3:'''
    
Code under the assumption that 
* The input file does not fit into memory
* The length of the individual strings to compare can be up to 100000 characters (fits into memory). 


'''Example of Function Input and Result:'''

x = "abcdefghijklm"

y = "hijklmnopqrst"

return: "abcdefg"


'''Example Input File:'''

    Column_1 (x) Column_2 (y)
    abcdefghijklm hijklmnopqrstuvw
    aioludhfgakjn akjnopqrstuvwxuh
    ......        .......
    ......        .......

There will be no header in the file and the columns are separated with a tab character (\t).


'''Target:'''

The target is optimal code, therefore there are several goals (in no
particular order):
* Code quality (maintability, reusability, OO design, etc)
* CPU & RAM efficiency

Using multiple threads to speed up the comparison is a plus. 

'''Please note that the task is not very well defined''' and you will have to make some assumptions, please make sure to document all of them. Also provide an appropriate Javadoc for your program if you coding for the goal 2 or 3.  

Either code for one, two or all of the goals.