back to [[CVS_to_SVN_Migration]]

===Steps during the migration process===

A) Test the migration procedure to ensure nothing gets lost

B) We will declare a CVS freeze at a certain date (giving you enough time to commit all your latest changes to CVS). At this point we will also do a quick BioJava release (version 1.5.1)

C) After the freeze the final svn migration will happen

D) from that moment on all future Biojava development will happen via svn, CVS will remain frozen.

==Progress Status==


=== CVS freeze ===

The freeze of the CVS has been declared for '''Wednesday December 12th, 2007'''.
Please commit any code to CVS before that date.

In the days after the repository will be migrated to subversion (SVN) . From then on all
future development will be happening in the new SVN repository. All code (+ history)  will be
available via SVN. 

After the CVS freeze we will also do a (minor) BioJava release. This will be BioJava version 1.5.1





=== Testing the migration procedure ===

The testing phase has finished. 

This procedure will be used for the conversion: (a hack of cvs2svn)
[http://hoopajoo.net/misc/converting_to_svn.html]

Thanks to George Hartzell for doing the actual conversion.

To test the svn dump [http://www.statsvn.org/ statsvn] is being run on the whole repository. This allows to check if the history has been converted correctly and if there are any problems within the repository.



==== Problems found during testing phase ====

A few problems have been found:

===== Attic files =====
These six files caused problems:
<pre>
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/ResultPrinter.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/ResultPrinter.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/SSAHASeq.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/SSAHASeq.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/CreateDNAFastaHashTable.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/CreateDNAFastaHashTable.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/SSAHA.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/SSAHA.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/CreateEmblHashTable.java,v and biojava/biojava-live/demos/ssaha/Attic/CreateEmblHashTable.java,v
  ERROR: A CVS repository cannot contain both
  biojava/biojava-live/src/org/biojava/bio/annodb/IndexedAnnotationDB.java,v
  and
  biojava/biojava-live/src/org/biojava/bio/annodb/Attic/IndexedAnnotationDB.java,v
</pre>

Here's a reference that discusses the issue:

  http://cvs2svn.tigris.org/faq.html#atticprob

To resolve this problems the files in the Attic subdirectory are getting removed and not being imported to SVN


===== Upper case / lower case problems =====

There are a few files in the repository that have a upper case / lower case file name clash with another file.
To resolve this they are going to be renamed.
<pre>
/biojava-live/branches/mattandtom/src/org/biocorba 
/biojava-live/branches/mattandtom/src/org/biojava/bridge/biocorba 
/biojava-draft/biojava-live/tags/biojava/src/org/biocorba 
/biojava-live/tags/biojava/src/org/biojava/bridge/biocorba
</pre>



===== Escape characters in log statements =====

svn log -v --xml gives this error message:

svn log: An invalid XML character (Unicode: 0x1b) was found in the element content of the document.

this seems to be a bug in SVN:
http://subversion.tigris.org/issues/show_bug.cgi?id=2866

after manually removing the 2 escape characters from the log statements
svn log -v --xml works fine.