== I've noticed some misprints in BioJavaX Documentation and in the source code. ==

[[BioJava:BioJavaXDocs#Writing_2|Here]] in [[BioJava:BioJavaXDocs|BioJavaXDocs]] it is said that GenBank Field FEATURE can be outputted as follows:

"...For the source feature, the db_xref and organism fields are added to the output by calling '''getNCBITaxon().getNCBITaxID()''' and '''getNCBITaxon().getDisplayName()''' on the ''sequence'' (the latter is chopped before the first bracket if necessary)...."

If I clearly understand, the '''RichSequence''' object is ment by ''sequence''. But there is no '''getNCBITaxon()''' method in the '''RichSequence''' class. There is '''getTaxon()''' method in the '''RichSequence''' class. Thus, exectly this method should be used here instead of '''getNCBITaxon()''' method.

----
Iwas working with sequence file in GenBank format. This file contained the following text fragment:

<code>
 ...
  FEATURES           Location/Qualifiers
     source          1..4214630
                     /organism="Bacillus subtilis subsp. subtilis str. 168"
                     /mol_type="genomic DNA"
                     /strain="168"
                     /db_xref="taxon:224308"
     gene            4866..6782
                     /gene="gyrB"
                     /locus_tag="BSU00060"
                     /note="synonym: novA"
                     /db_xref="GeneID:939456"
     CDS             4866..6782
                     /gene="gyrB"
                     /locus_tag="BSU00060"
                     /EC_number="5.99.1.3"
                     /function="initation of replication cycle and DNA
                     elongation"
                     /note="decatenates newly replicated chromosomal DNA and
                     relaxes positive and negative DNA supercoiling"
                     /codon_start=1
                     /transl_table=11
                     /product="DNA topoisomerase IV subunit B"
                     /protein_id="NP_387887.1"
                     /db_xref="GI:16077074"
                     /db_xref="GOA:P05652"
                     /db_xref="UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot:P05652"
                     /db_xref="GeneID:939456"
                     /translation="MEQQQNSYDENQIQVLEGLEAVRKRPGMYIGSTNSKGLHHLVWE
                     IVDNSIDEALAGYCTDINIQIEKDNSITVVDNGRGIPVGIHEKMGRPAVEVIMT"
 ...
</code>

I used the followng code to get values of notes '''/function''', '''/note''' and '''/translation''' of the FEATURE Field:

<java>

RichSequenceIterator seqs = RichSequence.IOTools.readGenbankDNA(br, ns);
RichSequence seq = seqs.nextRichSequence();

Iterator fsit = seq.getFeatureSet().iterator();
RichFeature rf = (RichFeature) fsit.next();

Set noteSet = rf.getNoteSet();
Iterator nit = noteSet.iterator();

String function = "", note = "";

while (nit.hasNext()) {

  SimpleNote sn = (SimpleNote) nit.next();
  String snTermName = sn.getTerm().getName(); 

  if (fType.equals("CDS")) {

    if (snTermName.equals("function")) {

      function = sn.getValue();
      System.out.println("Function:\n" + function);
    } else if (snTermName.equals("note")) {

      note = sn.getValue();
      System.out.println("Note:\n" + note);
    } else if (snTermName.equals("translation")) {

      translation = sn.getValue();
      System.out.println("Translation:\n" + translation);
    }
  }
}
</java>

The output was as follows:

<code>
 Function:
 initation of replication cycle and DNA
 elongation
 Note:
 decatenates newly replicated chromosomal DNA and
 relaxes positive and negative DNA supercoiling
 Translation:
 MEQQQNSYDENQIQVLEGLEAVRKRPGMYIGSTNSKGLHHLVWEIVDNSIDEALAGYCTDINIQIEKDNSITVVDNGRGIPVGIHEKMGRPAVEVIMT               
<\code>

As one can see from the output the '''getValue()''' method of the '''SimpleNote''' class returns String objects that contain ''new line symbols'' when its object represents '''function''' & '''note''' terms. 
I consider this rather irrational. One can also see that there are no ''new line symbols'' in the case of '''translation''' term. This is well.